
    Allah in the name of The Most Affectionate, the Merciful.

    All praise unto Allah, Lord of all the worlds.

    The most Affectionate, The Merciful.

    Master of the Day of Requital.

    We worship You alone, and beg You alone for help.

    Guide us in the straight path.

    The path of those whom You have favoured. Not of those who have earned Your anger and nor of those who have gone astray.

=




	Search 		
	
     	Home > Quran > Translation In English > Surah Al-Baqara

	
Al-Quran Menu

	Quran Home
	Arabic Text
	Urdu Translation
	English Translation
	Arabic and Urdu
	Arabic and English
	Arabic Urdu English
	Verse by Verse
	Urdu with Tafseer
	Tilawat
	

	
Main Menu

	Home
	Al-Quran
	Ahadees
	Faizan-e-Sunnat
	Duain
	Durood Sharif
	Naat City
	Islamic Books
	Pictures Gallery
	Kalmay
	Beautiful Names
	Contact Us
	

	
Mailing List



	








	
Translation of Quran In English - Surah Al-Baqara





    Alif-Lam Mim (Individual Letters of Arabic Alphabet).

    That high ranked Book (Quran) whereof there is no place of doubt, in it there is guidance to the God-fearing.

    Who believe without seeing, and establish prayer and spend in Our path, out of Our provided subsistence.

    And who believe in what has been sent down towards you, O beloved prophet! And what has been sent downbefore you and are convinced of the Last Day.

    They alone are on the guidance from their Lord and they alone are the gainers.

    Surely, as to those who are destined to infidelity, it is alike whether you warn them or warn them not, they willnever believe.

    Allah has set a seal on their hearts and on their ears, and over their eyes there is a dark covering, and for themis great torment.

    And some people say, 'We have believed in Allah and the Last Day' yet they are not to believe.

    They seek to deceive Allah and the believers, and in fact, they deceive not but their own souls, and theyperceive not.

    In their hearts is a disease, so Allah has increased their disease and for them is a painful torment, therecompense of their lies.

    And when it is said to them, create not disorder on the earth, they say, 'we are but reformats'.

    Be-ware! It is they who are the mischief-makers, but they perceive not.

    And when it is said to them 'believe as others have believed,' they say, 'shall we believe as fools', believe,Beware! It is they who are the fools, but they do not know.

    And when they meet believers, they say, 'we believe', and when they are alone with their devils, they say, 'weare with you, we are only mocking'.

    Allah mocks at them (Befitting His Dignity) and leaves them to wander about in their contumacy.

    They are those people who purchased error for guidance but their trade earned them no profit, and theyindeed knew not the way of trading.

    Their example is like the one who kindled a fire, so when it lit up all around him, Allah took away their light andleft them in darkness where nothing is seen.

    Deaf, Dumb, blind, so they are not to return.

    Or like a rain pouring from the sky. Wherein is darkness and thunder and lightning, they thrust fingers in theirears because of the thunderclaps for fear of death and Allah has encompassed the disbeliveers.

    It so "seems that the lightning, would snatch away the, sights whenever there is some flashing they walktherein and when it is dark, they stand still, and if Allah willed He would have taken away their ears and sights,surely Allah can do everything.

    O Mankind! Worship your Lord Who has created you and those before you, haply you may become pious.

    And Who made the earth a bed for you, and the sky a structure and caused water to come down from heavenhence brought forth therewith some fruits for your food, therefore do not set up equals for Allah knowingly.

    And if you are in some doubt, concerning what We sent down upon Our special devotee, then bring onechapter like it, and call upon all your helpers beside Allah, if you are truthful.

    Then if you cannot bring and We declare that you can never bring, hence dread the fire whose fuel is men andstones, is prepared for the disbeliveers.

    And give glad tidings to those who accepted faith and did good deeds, that for them there are gardens underwhich flow streams. Whenever they would be provided with a fruit to eat, they would say seeing its shape thisis the same substance which we got before and that was given to them resembling in shape, and for themthere are pure mates and therein they will abide for ever.

    Surely, Allah not ashamed of describing any thing for illustration, be it a gnat or above it, hence those whoaccepted faith, they know that it is the truth from their Lord, and those who are disbeliveers they say, "Whatdoes Allah mean by such a similitude". Allah sends astray many by it and guides many and Bends astray thoseby it who are disobedient

    Those who break the covenant of Allah after its confirmation and sever that which Allah ordered to join andspread disorder in the earth, they are the only losers.

    How you will disbelieve in Allah, whereas, you were dead, He gave you life, then will cause you to die thenagain will give you life, then towards Him you will return.

    He it is Who created for you all that is in the earth, then turned toward the heaven, then formed sevenheavens correctly and He knows all and every thing.

    And recall when your Lord said to the Angels, I am about to place a vice-generate in the earth, they said, "willYou place such who will spread disorder and shed blood'? And We praise You commending You and sanctifyYou; He told, 'I know what you know not'.

    And Allah the Exalted taught the names of all things to Adam. Then presenting all shines before the Angelssaid, "Tell the names of these, if you are truthful."

    They said 'Sanctity to You", We know nothing, but what You Taught us, no doubt, You alone are the Knowerand the Wise.

    He "said, "O Adam tell them the names of all shines, when Adam had informed them of the names of all, Hetold, had I not told you that I know all the hidden things of the beavers and earth, and I know whatever youdisclose and whatever you hide.

    And recall, when We ordered the angels to prostrate before Adam, then all prostrated save Iblis. He refused,boasted, and became disbeliever.

    And We said, "O Adam dwell you and your wife in this (paradise) and eat freely thereof where you will but donot approach this tree lest you become of the transgressors.

    Then Satan made them slip and got them out from the place where they lived, and We said, "get down, one ofyou is the enemy of the other and you have to stay in the earth and to make use of it for a time.

    Then Adam learnt certain words from his Lord so Allah accepted his penitence. Surely, He is the alone mostRelenting, Merciful.

    We said, "you all get down from the paradise then if any guidance comes to you from Me, then who-so-everfollowed My guidance, they have no fear nor any grieve.

    And those who disbelieve and shall belie My signs, they are the people of the hell, they have to live in itforever.

    O Children of Yaqoob recall My, that favor which I bestowed upon you and fulfill My covenant, I shall fulfill yourcovenant and dread Me alone.

    And believe in what I sent down confirming that which is with you and be not the first rejecter of it and acceptnot small price for My signs and dread Me alone.

    And confound not the truth with falsehood and conceal not the truth knowingly.

    And establish prayer and pay the Zakat (Poor due) and bow with those who bow.

    Do you order righteousness to mankind and forget yourselves whereas you read the Book? Then, have you nosense?

    And seek help in patience and prayer, and surely, the prayer is hard indeed save to those, who lean towardsMe with their hearts.

    Who are sure that they have to meet their Lord and to return unto Him alone.

    O Children of Yaqoob recall My favor, which I bestowed upon you, and exalted you over the entire world inyour time.

    And fear the day, when no soul shall be a substitute for another, and nor any Intercession be accepted for theinfidels and nor his soul be freed for any compensations and nor shall they be helped.

    And recall when We delivered you from the Pharaoh's people that afflicted you with grievous torment,slaughtering your sons and keeping your daughters alive and in this, there was a great trial or great rewardfrom your Lord.

    And when We divided the river for you then saved you and drowned pharaohs' people before your eyes.

    And We made a promise of forty night' with Moses, then after him, you began worshipping a calf and you wereunjust.

    Then We pardoned you after that, so that you might be grateful.

    And when We gave the Book to Moses and Criterion to judge between right and wrong, so that you might beon right path.

    And when Moses said to his people, "O my people, you have do" injustice to your souls by taking the Calf, turntherefore towards your Creator then kill amongst your selves each other. That is better for you with yourCreator, so He accepted your penitence. Surely, He is alone the most Relenting, Merciful.

    And when you said, "O Moses, we shall never believe you, until we see Allah manifestly, then the thunder boltovertook you, while you were looking.

    Then We made you alive after your death, so that you might be grateful.

    And We made cloud your shade and sent down on you Manna and Salwa, eat of Our good things, provided byUs, and they did no harm to Us, yes they had harmed their own souls.

    And when We said, "Go into this town, then eat freely there from wherever you will, and enter the gateprostrating and say, 'forgive our sins', We shall forgive your sins end it is possible that more be given to theright doers.

    Then the unjust changed the words beside that which had been told, so We sent down upon them a scourgefrom heaven, in lieu of their disobedience.

    And when Moses asked water for his people, then We said, "Strike this rock with your staff," atone, theregushed forth twelve springs therefrom. Each group knew its drinking place. Eat and drink of what Allah hasprovided and do not wander in the earth raising mischief.

    And when you said, "O Moses, we will not remain content with one food, pray then to your Lord, that He bringforth for us of what the earth grows, some vegetables and cucumbers and wheat and lentils and onions," said,"Do you demand inferior thing in exchange of the superior?" Well get down in Egypt or in any city, there youshall get that which you demanded, and humiliation and poverty were stamped upon them and drew-in thewrath of Allah. This was in lieu of their refusal of the Signs of Allah and slaying the prophets unjustly. This wasdue to their disobedience and transgression.

    Surely, those who believe, and the Jews and the Christians and the Sabians, whoever have faith with truehearts in Allah and in the Last-day and do good deeds, their reward is with their Lord, and there shall he nofear for them nor any grief.

    And when We took a covenant from you and raised high above you the mount Toor, hold firmly to what Wegive you, and remember what is therein, in the hope that you may become God-fearing.

    Then you turned back thereafter, so if there had been no Grace of Allah and His mercy upon you, then youwould have been among the losers.

    And, undoubtedly, you surely know, those among you who rebelled in the matter of Saturday (Sabbath). SoWe said to them, "Be Apes, despised."

    Thus, We made this event of that town a warning to those of the present and to those after them and a lessonto the God-fearing.

    And when Moses said to his people, "Allah commands you to slaughter a cow". They said, "you make us alaughingstock". He said, "refuge of Allah, that I be among the ignorant".

    They said, "pray to your Lord that He tell to us, what kind of the cow, is," he said, "says He, she is a cow,neither old nor immature, but in between both", so do what you are commanded.

    They said, "Pray to your Lord that He tell to us what her color is," he said, 'says He, she is a yellow cow, whosecolor is intensely deep, delightful to the beholders.

    They said, "Pray to Your Lord that He explain clearly to us, what kind of cow is that. Certainly, we have becomedubious about cows, and if Allah wills, we shall get the guidance.

    (Moses) said, "Says He, that she is a cow, no service is taken from her nor she ploughs the earth, nor waterthe filth, unblemish in which there is no spot. They said, "now you brought the truth, then they slaughtered herand were not willing to slaughter.

    And when you shed blood, then began accusing for it each other and Allah was to disclose what you werehiding.

    Then We said, "strike with a part of that cow to the slain. Allah thus will give life to the dead and shows youHis Signs, so that you may understand.

    Then, thereafter your hearts hardened, then they are like stones, but harder than these; and of stones thereare some from which rivers gush forth and some are those which split, then water comes therefrom and thereare some which fall down for fear of Allah, and Allah is not unmindful of your doings.

    Then O Muslims! Do you covet that the Jews would believe you? And one group of them was that which usedto hear the words of Allah, then used to pervert it knowingly after having understood it.

    And when they meet Muslims, they say, 'we accepted the faith', and when they are alone among themselves,then they say, "Do you explain to Muslims that knowledge which Allah disclosed to you, that they therebyargue with you before your Lord. Have you no wisdom?

    Do they not know that Allah knows all that they conceal and all that they disclose?

    And some of them are illiterate who do not know the Book, but oral reading or their own false notions and theyare in mere supposition.

    Then there is woe for them who write the Book with their own hands and then say, "this is from Allah", so thatthey may gain small price in lieu of it. Then there is woe for them for the writings of their own hands and woeto them for such earning.

    And they said, "the fire shall not touch us except for numbered days", Say then, have you taken a promisefrom Allah, then Allah, will never break His Promise. Or you say about Allah that which you do not know.

    Aye, why not, who so earns vice and his sin encompasses him, he is one among the people of the hell, theyhave to remain therein forever.

    And those, who accepted faith and did good works. They are the people of Paradise. They have to remaintherein forever.

    And when We took covenant from the children of Israel that worship none save Allah and do good to parentsand to kindred, and orphans and the needy and speak good to people and establish prayer and pay the poor-due (Zakat); then you turned back, except a few among you and you are back-sliders.

    And when We took a covenant from you, that shed no blood of your own and turn not out your own peoplefrom your own towns, then you affirmed it and you are witnesses.

    Then it is you who began slaying your own people and turn out a group of your own people from theirhomeland, provide help to (their opponents) against them in sin and transgression, and if they come to you ascaptive, you ransom them, and their expulsion is unlawful for you. Do you then have faith on somecommandments of God and refuse some other. Then whose of you do such, what is the reward of it, savedisgrace in the world, and on the day of Resurrection, they shall be driven towards severest torment, and Allahis not unaware of your doings.

    These are the people who purchased the life of the world for the life of Hereafter, so neither the torment shallbe lightened from over them nor they shall be helped.

    And verily, We gave Moses the Book and after him send Messengers one after another, repeatedly, and gaveclear signs to Jesus son of Mary and helped him with the Holy Spirit. Then, do you grow arrogant; when anyMessenger came to you with what your soul desires not? So belie you a group of them (Prophets) and slayanother group.

    The Jews said, "our hearts are wrapped with covers, Nay Allah cursed them because of their blasphemy, solittle of them accept faith.

    And when there came to them, that Book (Quran) of Allah, which confirms the Book (Taurat) with them, andbefore that they were asking for victory over the infidels by means of the same prophet. Then, when came tothem that known and recognised one, they rejected him. So Allah's curse on those who reject.

    They sold their souls, for what a miserable price that they deny what Allah has sent down, with this jealousythat, Allah of His grace send revelation on whomsoever of His devotees He pleases. Thus they became worthyof wrath upon wrath and there is humiliating torment for the infidels.

    And when it is said to them, "Have faith in what Allah has sent down," then they say, 'We have faith in whathas been sent down to us and reject the rest, though it is the truth confirming what is with them. Say you,'why did you then kill former prophets, if you had faith upon your Book'?

    And assuredly, Moses came to you with clear signs, then after that you made the calf a god and you wereunjust.

    And recall, when We took a covenant from you and raised above your heads the mountain Tur, hold what Wegive to you with firmness and listen. They said, 'We heard and did not accept,' and the calf was permeating intheir hearts because of their infidelity. Say then! 'What a vile command is given to you by your faith, if at allyou have faith'.

    Say you: 'if the last home near Allah be for you solely, not for others, then well long for death, if you aretruthful.

    And they will never long for it ever, because of their evil deeds, which they have done before, and Allah knowsthe unjust well.

    And undoubtedly, you will find them that they are necessarily most covetous of life even more than of all thepeople. And of idolaters, one is desirous of having a life of thousand years, and that will not keep him awayfrom the torment, even being granted such life. And Allah is seeing their doings.

    Say you, 'whoever be the enemy of Jibril-then he (Jibril) caused to descend on your heart this Quran by theCommand of Allah, Confirming the former Books, and there is guidance and glad tidings to Muslims'.

    Whoever be the enemy of Allah and His angels and His Messengers and Jibril and Mikael, then Allah is theenemy of infidels.

    And undoubtedly, We sent down towards you manifest Signs; and none would be denying them but thedisobedients.

    And is it that whenever they enter into a covenant, one party of them throws it out' Nay; most of them have nofaith?

    And when came to them a Messenger from Allah confirming their Books. A party of the people of the Bookthrew away the Book of Allah behind their backs, as if they had no knowledge.

    And they followed that which was being recited by the devils in the reign of Suleman and Suleman did notdisbelieve, yes; the devils disbelieved. They teach magic to people and that (Magic) which was sent down untothe two angels Harut & Marut in Babel. But both did teach nothing to anyone till they did not say this, "We arenothing but trial", then do not therefore lose your faith. They learnt that from them by which they might causeseparation between man and his wife, and they can not harm anyone, but by the command of Allah. And theylearn that which will harm them, and will not profit. And undoubtedly, they know that one who took this trade,has no share in the hereafter and undoubtedly, what the evil thing is that for which they sold their souls, hadthey known!

    And if they had accepted faith and kept themselves aloof from sins, then there is better reward from Allah, hadthey known.

    O Men of faith do not say. Raina, but say humbly, respected Sir. "Look upon us" and from very beginning listencarefully, and for the disbeliveers is a grievous torment.

    Those who are infidels, whether people of the book or idolaters, do not desire that any good should be sentdown to you from your Lord and Allah chooses for His Mercy, whomsoever He pleases, and Allah is ofExceeding Bounty.

    When any verse We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, then shall bring one better or the like thereof. Do younot know that Allah can do all and every thing?

    Do you not know that the sovereignty of heavens and earth is only for Allah and beside Allah, you have neitherany supporter nor helper?

    Do you wish to question your Messenger as Moses was questioned before and whoever exchanges faith forunbelief, he rightly has gone astray from the right path?

    Many of the people of the Book desired, had you been turned back towards infidelity after faith! Out of sheerenvy of their hearts, after it that the truth has become manifest unto them, so leave them and overlook, tillAllah brings His command. Undoubtedly Allah is powerful over every thing.

    And keep up the prayer and pay Zakat (poor due) and whatever good you shall send forth for your souls, youshall find it with Allah. Undoubtedly Allah is seeing your doings.

    And the people of the Book spoke, 'None shall enter paradise, but he who be a Jew or Christian. These aretheir vain desires. Say, you 'Bring your proof, if you are truthful'.

    Yes, why not, who submitted his face for Allah and is the doer of good, then his reward is with his Lord andthey have neither any fear nor any grief.

    And the Jews spoke, '`The Christians are nothing," and Christians spoke; "The Jews are nothing," though theyread the Book. Even thus the illiterates said the like of their saying. Then Allah will judge between them on theDay of Judgement regarding that wherein they are disputing.

    Who is more unjust than he who prevents the mosques of Allah from being mentioned the name of Allah, andstrives to ruin them, it was not proper for them to enter the mosques but with fear. For them, there is disgracein the world and for them, there is great torment in the hereafter.

    And east and west all is for Allah, then whichever side you turn your face there is the face of Allah (The mercyof Allah inclined towards you). Undoubtedly Allah is all Embracing, all Knowing.

    And they say 'Allah has taken unto Himself a son', sanctity is for Him. Nay, whatever is in the heavens and is inthe earth is His possession. All are unto Him subservient.

    The Originator of the heavens and the earth, and when He decrees any thing, then says to it only, 'Be and itbecomes at once."

    And the illiterates spoke, 'Why Allah speaks not to us or any sign is being given to us. Likewise said thosebefore them, similar to their saying. The hearts of these people and of those are alike. Undoubtedly, Wemanifested the signs for the persons of firm faith.

    Assuredly, We have sent you with the truth; bearer of glad tidings and a Warner and you shall not bequestioned about the inmates of Hell.

    And never the Jews and Christians will be pleased with you unless you follow their Din (creed). Say then! 'Theguidance of Allah is the only guidance', (O listener who he may be) if you become follower of their desires,after the knowledge that has come to you, then no one will be your protector from Allah and no helper.

    Those who have been given the Book by Us, they recite it as it ought to be, they alone have faith unto it andthose who disbelieve it, they alone are the losers.

    O Children of Yaqoob! Remember My favour which I bestowed upon you and that I exalted you above allpeople of that period.

    And fear the day when no soul shall be a substitute for another and nor it shall be freed for any compensation,and nor any intercession will profit the infidels and nor will they be helped.

    And when his Lord tested Ibrahim with certain words then he fulfilled them. Said He "I am to make you leaderof the people," submitted he" and from my off springs". Said He, "My covenant does not reach to the unjust".

    And recall! When We made this house a place of assembly for the people and a place of safety, and make thestation of Ibrahim a place of prayer and We enjoined strictly upon Ibrahim and Ismail to purify well My housefor those who go around it and those who stay therein for devotion and those who bow down and prostrate.

    And when Ibrahim submitted "O my Lord make this City a region of peace and feed the inhabitants of it withvaried fruits to such of them who believe in Allah and the Last Day,' said He, "and who became unbeliever, tohim also I will give a little to use, and then shall force him towards the torment of the hell and that is an evilplace of return.

    And when Ibrahim was raising the foundations of this house and Ismail (too) praying, O Our Lord accept fromus, undoubtedly, You alone Hear and Know'.

    'O Our Lord! Make us submissive to You and of our offspring a nation submissive to You, tell us our ways ofworship, and turn to us with Your mercy. Surely, You alone are most Relenting and Merciful.

    'O Our Lord, and send in them a messenger from among themselves, who may recite to them Your signs andteach them Your Book and wise knowledge and may purify them well. Surely, You are alone the Predominant,the Wise.

    And who will turn his face from the religion of Ibrahim, save one who is a foolish in heart, and undoubtedly,We necessarily, chose him in the world and surely he is among the people having ability to gain Our specialproximity in the hereafter.

    When his Lord said to him, "Surrender", submitted he, 'I surrendered to Him, Who is the Lord of all the worlds'.

    And Ibrahim left the legacy of the same religion to his sons and Yaqoob too; that 'O my sons, surely Allah haschosen this religion for you, therefore die not, but as Muslim.

    On the contrary, some of you were present, when death came to Yaqoob, when he said to his sons, 'whom youwill worship after me', said they 'we shall worship He Who is your God and of your fathers Ibrahim and Ismailand Ishaque, the one God and to Him we have submitted ourselves'.

    This is a community that has passed away, for them what they earned and for you are what you earn and youshall not be questioned for their deeds.

    And the people of the book spoke, 'Be Jews or Christians, you will get guidance'. Say you, 'on the contrary, wetake the religion of Ibrahim who was away from every falls-hood and was not among the polytheists'.

    Say like this, 'we believe in Allah and what has been sent down towards us and what was sent down onIbrahim and Ismail and Ishaque and Yaqoob and on his son and what was given to Moses and Christ and whatwas given to the rest of the prophets from their Lord: we do not differentiate between any of them in thematter of faith and we have submitted ourselves to Allah.

    Then if they believe too, as you have believed then they are guided, and if they turn back their faces, then theyare but in total schism. So, O beloved, prophet! Soon Allah will suffice you on behalf of them. He is aloneHearing and Knowing.

    We took the dye of Allah and whose dye is better than Allah and We worship Him alone.

    Say you! 'Do you dispute about Allah, though He is our Lord and yours too; and our doings are with us andyour doings with you, and we belong totally to Him alone.

    On the contrary, you say like this, that Ibrahim, and Ismail and Ishaque and Yaqoob and his sons were Jews orChristians; say then, 'have you more knowledge or Allah,' and who is more unjust than he who conceals' thetestimony and Allah is not unmindful of your doings.

    That is a community that has passed away, for them is their earning and for you is your earning and you shallnot be questioned of their works.

    Now the fools will say: 'who has turned the Muslims from their Qibla on which they had been? Say you: 'Eastand West all belong to Allah; He guides whom He likes to the right path.

    And thus We made you exalted among all nations that you may be witnesses to the people and this Messengeryour guard and witness. And O, beloved! We had not made that Qibla upon which you had been before, but tosee who follows the Messenger and who turns back upon his heals. And verily, indeed it was hard, but to thosewho were guided by Allah. And it does not behave Allah that He might waste your faith: Verily Allah is veryKind and Merciful to human beings.

    We are seeing the turning of your face towards heaven repeatedly; necessarily then We will turn you towardsthat Qibla which pleases you. Turn your face towards the sacred mosque (Kaaba) just now; and O Muslims!Turn your faces towards the same, whenever you be. And those who; have been given the Book knownecessarily, that this is the truth from their Lord, and Allah is not unaware of their doings.

    And even if you should, bring every sign to those people of the Book, they would not follow your Qibla: Andyou follow not their Qibla; and they are not followers of each other Qibla among themselves too. And (Olistener, whoever he may be) if you should follow their desires after the knowledge that has been given to you,then at that time, you shall surely be of the transgressors.

    Those whom We gave the Book recognise this prophet as man recognises his sons and no doubt, a group ofthem conceal the truth knowingly.

    (O Listener) It is the truth from your Lord (or the truth is that which is from your Lord) then beware! Doubtnot.

    And there is a direction of inclination for every one towards which, he turns his face; then desire that you maysurpass others in good deeds. Wherever you be, Allah will bring you all together. No doubt, Allah has thepower to do all that He wills.

    And from where so ever you come forth turn your face towards the sacred Mosque (Kaaba) and that isnecessarily, the truth from your Lord and Allah is not unaware of your doings.

    And O beloved! When so-ever you come forth turn your face towards the sacred Mosque (Kaaba) And OMuslims! Turn your faces towards the same, wherever you be, so that people may have no argument againstyou, but those among them who do injustice, so fear them not and fear Me. And it is for this that I may perfectMy favour upon you and that you may be rightly guided.

    As We sent in you Messenger from among you, that he recites Our signs to you and purifies you and teachesyou the Book and mature knowledge and teaches you that which you did not know.

    Therefore remember Me, I shall remember you, and accept My right and do not be ungrateful to Me.

    O Believers! Seek help with patience and prayer; no doubt, Allah is with the Patients.

    And say not those who are killed in the path of Allah as dead; but they are alive yes, you are unaware.

    And necessarily, We shall put you to test with something of fear and hunger and with some loss of wealth andlives and fruits; and give glad tidings to the patient.

    That when any calamity comes to them, then they say "We are belongings of Allah and we are to return to Himalone."

    These are the people on whom are the benediction from their Lord and mercy; and they are only on theguidance.

    No doubt, Safa and Marwa are among the symbols of Allah, then whose makes pilgrimage to this House orperforms "Umra", there is no sin for him that he may go round both, and who so does any good voluntarily,then Allah is Appreciating and All-knowing.

    No doubt, those who conceal what We have sent down of clear signs and guidance after that We have made itclear in the Book for the people, on them there is the curse of Allah and the curse of those who curse.

    But those who repent and amend and make manifest then I shall accept their repentance and I am the onlyRelenting Merciful.

    No doubt, those who disbelieved and died as disbeliveers on them is the curse of Allah and of Angels and ofmen combined.

    They will ever remain in it, neither the torment shall be lightened from them and nor shall they be grantedrespite.

    And your God is one God, there is no God but He most Gracious and Merciful.

    Verily, the creation of heavens and earth and coming of night and day alternately, and the boat that sails in theriver for the benefit of the people, and that which Allah sends down of water from heaven, and revives thedead earth thereby and scatters all kinds of beast therein, and the change of winds and the cloud that isobedient between heaven and earth, in all of them, necessarily there are signs for the wise people.

    And some people set some other deities of worship other than Allah that they love them as they are to loveAllah and the believers love not anyone equal to that of Allah. And what would be the condition, if thetransgressors see the time when the torments would come before their eyes, because all power belongs toAllah and because the torment of Allah is severe.

    When those who were followed would be disgusted with their followers and would see the torment and all theirties shall be cut asunder.

    And the followers will say, 'Would that for us there were a return (in the world) then We would have brokenwith them as they have broken with us. Thus will Allah show them their works as anguish for them, and theyare not to come out from the Fire.

    O, Mankind! Eat of whatever is in earth lawful clean and follow not the steps of the Devil, no doubt, he is youropen enemy.

    He will only command you to evil and indecency and that you should say of Allah what you do not know.

    And when it is said to them, 'follow what Allah has sent down, they say, 'Nay We shall follow that whereon wefound our fathers, what! Even if their fathers had no sense at all and no guidance?

    And the saying of disbeliveers is like him who calls unto that who hears nothing except a shout and cry; deaf,dumb, blind, so they have no sense.

    O, believers! Eat our good things provided to you, and be grateful to Allah, if it is He whom you worship.

    He has only made unlawful to you the Carrion, and blood and the flesh of swine and the animal that has beenslaughtered by calling a name other than Allah. But he who is driven by necessity, eat neither desiring not,exceeding the need then there is no sin on him, no doubt, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.

    Those who conceal the Book sent down by Allah and in exchange of it accept mean price; they fill-in theirbellies with fire only and Allah will not talk to them on the Day of Resurrection and nor will He purify them andfor them is painful torment.

    Those are they who purchased error in exchange of guidance and torment for forgiveness. Then to whatdegree is their endurance for fire.

    This is because Allah sent down the Book with truth, and no doubt, those who began to put difference in theBook, they are necessarily, brawlers of highest degree.

    The real righteousness is not this that you turn your face towards East or West; yes, the real virtue is this thatone has faith in Allah and the Last day and the angels and the Book and the Prophets and gives his dear wealthfor love of Allah to kindred and orphans and the needy and the wayfarer and the beggars and for redeemingnecks, and establishes prayer and pays poor due (Zakat); and the performer of their promises when makepromise and the patients in tribulation and adversity and at time of crusade;-These are they, who proved truthof their talks and they are only God-fearing.

    O, believers: It is obligatory upon you to take retaliation of the blood of those who are killed innocently, the.Free for free and the slave for slave and woman for woman. Then as for him who is forgiven something by hisbrother, there should be demand for payment with kindness and the payment be made satisfactorily well. Thisis to ease your burden from your Lord and a mercy upon you. Then after this one who transgresses for himthere is painful torment.

    And there is life for you in retaliating for blood, O men of understanding! So that you may save yourselves.

    Made obligatory on you that when death approaches any of you, if he leaves some property, then he shouldmake a will for his parents and near relatives according to usage. This is an obligation on those who fear God.

    Then who so changes the will after hearing, the sin thereof is only on those who change it. No doubt, Allahknows and hears.

    Then who feared, that the testator has done certain injustice or sin, then he made peace between them, thereis no sin for him no doubt Allah is Forgiving Merciful.

    O Believers! Fasting have been made obligatory upon you as were made obligatory upon those before you, sothat you may become pious.

    The days are counted. Then who so among you is ill or on a journey then same number of fasting in otherdays, and those who have no strength, they should give in ransom meal to a needy: then who so does moregood voluntarily, then that is better for him, and fasting is better for you if you know.

    The month of Ramzan in which Quran was sent down, the direction for the people and guidance and clearsigns of judgement; that whoso of you finds this month, necessarily, he should fast in it, and whoso is ill or ona journey then same number of fasting in other days; Allah desires facility for you and desires not hardship andfor this, that you should complete the counting and speak of the Greatness of Allah, as He guided you and sothat you may be grateful.

    And O beloved, when My bondsmen ask you about Me, then I am indeed near, accept the call of the callerwhen he calls upon Me; then they should obey My Commands and believe in Me, so that they may get the way.

    It was made lawful for you to go near your women in the nights of fasting. They are your garments and youare their garments. Allah know that you used to put your souls in defalcation, then He accepted yourrepentance and pardoned you; then now copulate (Intercourse) with them and seek what Allah has written inyour destiny and eat and drink until white thread becomes distinct to you from the black thread at the dawn;then complete the fasts till coming of night, and do not touch the women when you remain in the mosques, fordevotion. These are the limits of Allah, do not approach them. Allah thus describes His Signs to the people, sothat they may become pious.

    And do not eat up unjustly the property of each other among yourselves and nor' convey their cases to theauthorities for devouring unlawfully some portion of the property of the people knowingly.

    They ask you about the new moons. Say you, 'They are the signs of time for the people and pilgrimage (Haj).And it is no virtue that you enter your houses by the backs thereof, yes, the virtue is piety, so come in housesby their doors and fear Allah in the hope that you may get prosperity.

    And fight in the way of Allah, those who fight against you and do not transgress, Allah does not love thetransgressors.

    And kill the infidels wherever you find and turn them out from the place where from they turned you out; andtheir mischief is more grievous than killing. And if they fight them near the sacred mosque unless they fightyou therein, and they fight against you then kill, them. This is the only punishment of infidels.

    Then if they desist, then no doubt, Allah is Forgiving Merciful.

    And fight them until there is no mischief and be there worship of one Allah, then if they desist, there is noviolence save against oppressors.

    There is forbidden month in exchange of forbidden month and elegant manner in exchange of elegant mannerWhoso does violence against you, do violence against him in the same measure as he did, and remain tearingAllah and know that Allah is with the God-fearing.

    And spend in the way of Allah, and cast not yourself in destruction with your hand and be good-doers; nodoubt! Good doers are the beloveds of Allah.

    And fulfil the Haj and Umra for Allah. Then if you are prevented, send sacrifice which you may get easily andshave not your heads, unless the sacrifice reaches its destination; Then whoso is ill of you or there is someailment in his head, then he should keep fast in exchange or give alms or sacrifice, then when you are at ease,then whoso takes advantage by combining Umra with Haj, on him there is sacrifice which may be obtainedeasily. Then whoso cannot afford. He should fast for three days during Haj and seven days when he returnsback home, these are ten days complete. This Command is for him who is not the dweller of Mecca andremains fearing to Allah and knows that the torment of Allah is severe.

    The months of Haj are known; then whoso determines to perform Haj in these months, then there should beno mention of Copulation before women nor any sin nor quarrelling with anyone till the time of Haj; andwhatever good you do, Allah knows it. And take necessary provision with you, the best provision is piety andremain fearing Me, O Men of under standing!

    There is no sin unto you that you seek the bounty of your Lord. Then when you return back from 'Arafat'remembers Allah near Mashhare-Haram (Qazah Mountain) and remembers Him as He guided you and nodoubt, you had gone astray before.

    Then the thing is this that O Men of Quraish, you also return back from the same place whence the peoplereturn back and seek forgiveness from Allah: no doubt Allah is Forgiving Merciful.

    Then when you have completed the acts of Haj, remember Allah as you used to remember your fathers, butmore than that, and some one says like this, 'O our Lord give us in the world and there is no share of him inthe Hereafter.

    And someone says like this, 'O our Lord give us good in the world and give us good in the Hereafter and saveus from the torment of the Hell

    To such people there is share from their earning and Allah is swift at reckoning.

    And remember Allah during Numbered days. Then whoso hastens to leave in two days; there is no sin unto himand whoso stays behind, then on him is no sin for the God fearing, and remain fearing God and know that youhave to be raised unto Him.

    And some one of men is he whose talk seems pleasing to you and bring Allah as a witness on what is in hisheart, while he is the greatest disputer.

    And when he turns his back then wanders spreading mischief in the land and destroys the crops and lives andAllah agrees not with the mist chief.

    And when it is said to him, 'fear Allah' then he becomes more persistence in sin, to such the hell is enough andthat is necessarily, a very bad bed.

    And some one of men sells his life in seeking the pleasure of Allah and Allah is Merciful over his bondmen.

    O People of Faith! enter into Islam as a whole and do not follow the footsteps of Satan (devil); no doubt, he isyour open enemy.

    And even after this, that clear commands have come unto you, you slip, then know that Allah is Mighty, Wise.

    What they are waiting for but for this that the torment of Allah should come in the coverings of clouds and theangels should come down and the affairs be completed and to Allah are all affairs returned.

    Ask children of Israel, how many clear signs We gave them and whoso changes the favour of Allah after it hascome, then no doubt, the torment of Allah is severe.

    The life of the world has been decorated in the eyes of infidels and they laugh at Muslims and those who fearwould be above them on the Day of Resurrection; and God bestows without counting whomsoever He pleases.

    People were on one religion thereafter Allah sent prophets giving good tidings and warning and sent down withthem the true Book that it should judge between people in their differences. And only those differed in theBook to whom it was given after clear commands had come to them, through refraction among themselves.Then Allah showed the truth to the believers in which they were quarrelling by His Command, and Allah showsthe straight path whomsoever He pleases.

    Do you imagine that you will enter Paradise, and yet the incidents like of your forerunners did not come untoyou? The affliction and adversity reached to them and they were badly shaken until the messenger andbelievers along with him said, 'when will come the help of Allah Listen: no doubt, the help of Allah is nigh.

    They ask you what they should spend. Say: whatever wealth you spend in good, then that is for parents andnear relatives and orphans and the needy and the wayfarer. And whatsoever good you do, no doubt: Allahknows it.

    It was made obligatory upon you, to fight in the path of God and though it is disliked by you, and it mayhappen that any thing may be disliked by you and that may be in your favour, and it may happen that anythingmay be liked by you and that may not be in your favour, and Allah knows and you do not know.

    They ask you the precept for fighting in the sacred month. Say you: 'Fighting therein is a great sin; but toprohibit from the way of Allah, and not to have faith in Him and to prevent from the sacred Mosque (Haram)and to oust its dwellers, are greater sins than it with Allah; and their mischief is more grievous than killing. Andthey will remain fighting against you always, until they turn you back from your faith, if they can. And whosoamong you turns back from his faith, then dies as an infidel, then their works shall go in vain in the world andin the Hereafter, and they are the people of Hell and will abide in it.

    Those who believed and those who left their home and hearth for Allah and fought in the way of Allah, theyare the aspirants of the mercy of Allah and Allah is Forgiving Merciful.

    They ask you the precept of wine and gambling. Say you, 'in both there is great sin and also some worldlyprofit for the people but their sin is greater than their profit and ask you what they ought to spend, say you,'that which is saved after your needs'. Thus, Allah explains to you His Signs so that you may do after reflecting,

    The works of the world and the Hereafter. And they ask you, the precept about orphans. Say you, 'To do goodto them is better, and if you intermix your and their expenses then they are your brothers; and Allah knowswell the mischief-maker from the reformer. And had Allah so willed, He would have put you into hardship, nodoubt, Allah is Mighty, Wise.

    And marry not idolaters until they accept faith and no doubt, a Muslim bondman is better than an idolater isthough she may please you. And give not in marriage to idolaters until they accept faith, and no doubt, aMuslim bondman is better than an idolater, though he may please you. They call towards Hell and Allah calltowards Heaven and forgiveness by His Command and explain His Signs for the people so that they may acceptadmonition.

    And they ask you the precept about menstruation. Say you: -that is a pollution, so keep away from womenduring menstruation and do not approach them until they are roach them until they are clean. Then when theyare clean, go in unto them whence Allah has commanded you. No doubt, Allah likes the constant repentanceand likes cleansers.

    Your women are tilths for you, then come in your tilth as you will, and do first the work for your good, andremain fearing Allah and know that you are to meet Him. And O beloved! Give glad tidings to the believers.

    And make not Allah the target of your oaths that you may take oath for not doing good and nor fearing Allahand nor making peace between men; and Allah Hears, Knows.

    Allah does not call you to account for your such oaths as they come out from your tongs unintentionally, yes,He calls you to account for what your hearts have done, and Allah is Forgiving, For" bearing.

    For those who swear off from going to their wives is an awaiting of four months; hence if they go back in thisperiod, then Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    And if you decide firmly to divorce, then Allah Hears, Knows.

    And divorced women should keep their souls away till three menstruations, and it is not lawful to them thatthey conceal what Allah has created in their wombs. If they have faith in Allah and the Last Day. And theirhusbands have the right to take them back during that period provided they will to rejoin. And the women haverights similar to those over them according to law, and men have superiority over them and Allah is Dominant,Wise.

    This divorce is for two times only; then is to retain with good or to release with kindness, and it is not allowedto you to take back something of what you have given to the women, but if both fear that they could not keepthe limits of Allah. Then, if you fear that the Twain shall not remain just on the same limits then there is no sinon them for that with which the woman ransoms herself. These are the limits of Allah, do not transgress them,and whoso transgresses the limits of Allah, then they are the oppressors.

    Then if she is divorced for the third time, then that women will not be lawful to him, until she lives with anotherhusband, then if that second one divorces her, then there is no sin on the twain if they come together again, ifthey think that they will observe the limits of Allah, and these are the limits of Allah. He explains them for thelearned.

    And when you divorce women and their period are completed, then, till that time either retain them kindly orrelease them kindly, but there should not be retention to hurt them so that you may transgress the limit andwhoso does this, he wrongs his own soul, and do not make jest of the signs of Allah and remember the favourof Allah upon you and the Book and Wisdom which He has sent down to you for admonishing you, and remainfearing Allah and know that Allah knows all things.

    And when you divorce women and their period are completed, then O guardians of women! Prevent them notfrom marrying their husbands, when they agree among themselves according to law. This counsel is given tohim who among you have faith in Allah and the Last Day. This is cleaner and purer for you, and Allah knowsand you do not know.

    And mothers should suckle their children for complete two years, for him who intends to complete the period ofsuckling, and to whom the child belongs, on him there is feeding and clothing of the women according toconvention. No soul shall be burdened but within his capacity, the mother should not be made to sufferbecause of her child and nor father because of his child or (the mother should not make the child to suffer, andnor father to his child, and the same is incumbent on the father's heir. Then if the mother and father both tryto wean by mutual consent and consultation, there is no sin on them; and if you wish that your children shouldbe suckled by nurses, then too there is no blame on you, provided what was agreed to pay is paid by you withkindness, and remain fearing Allah and know that Allah is seeing your works.

    And those of you who die and leave behind wives, they should keep themselves apart for a period of fourmonths and ten days, then when they complete their period, then O guardians! There is no blame on you inanything, which the women do with regard to themselves according to law. And Allah is aware what you do.

    And there is no sin on, you regarding this, that you sent offer of marriage to women by giving obscure hint orhold it in your hearts. Allah knows that now you will remember them. Yes, make not with them secret contract,but say that much only which is known in law. And do not resolve wedding-tie until the written term reaches toits period and know that Allah knows what is in your heart, then fear him and know that Allah is Forgiving,Forbearing

    There is no any demand against you if you divorce the women while you have not touched them or have fixedany dower. And give them something to carry on with the men of resources according to his means and thepoor according to his means some" thing to carry on with, this is incumbent on the well doers.

    And if you divorced women without touching them and for them you had already fixed some dower, then whatmuch was agreed half of it is incumbent but if the women forgo something or he gives more in whose hand isthe tied of the marriage, and O men your giving more is nearer to' piety. And do not forget doing good to eachother among! Your selves. No doubt, Allah is seeing your works.

    Watch over all your prayers and the middle prayer and stand before Allah with devotion.

    And if you are in fear then, on foot or riding, as you can, then when you are secure remember Allah as Hetaught you that which you did not know.

    And those of you who die and leave behind them wives, they should bequeath for their women to provide themmaintenance for a year without turning them out; then if they themselves leave, you are not accountableregarding any proper thing which they did in their matters and Allah is Dominant, Wise.

    And for a divorced woman too there is proper maintenance, it is incumbent on the God fearing

    Thus Allah explains His signs for you so that you may understand.

    O beloved! Had you not seen those who came out from their homes and they were in thousands for fear ofdeath? Then Allah said to them. "Die" and thereafter made them alive. No doubt, Allah is Gracious to peoplebut most of the people are ungrateful.

    And fight in the way of Allah and know that Allah Hears Knows.

    Is there any who should give a goodly loan to Allah so that Allah may increase many times for him. And Allahscants and amplifies, and you are to return unto Him.

    O Beloved! Did you not see a group of the children of Israel after Moosa? When they spoke to a prophet oftheirs, 'raise for us a king that we may fight in the way of Allah'. The prophet told, 'Are your style like this thatif the fighting is made obligatory on you, thereafter you may not fight'? Spoke they, 'what happened to us thatwe should not fight in the way of Allah whereas we have been driven away from our homeland and from ourChildren? But when fighting was made obligatory! On them, they turned their faces but a few of them, andAllah knows very well the, unjust.

    And their prophet said to them. 'Verily Allah has sent Talut as your king.' Spoke they 'How can there bekingship of him over us, whereas we are more entitled for the kingship than he, and nor he has been givenabundance of wealth too'. Said the prophet "Allah has chosen him over you, and has increased him abundantlyin knowledge and body, and Allah gives His kingdom to whom He will and Allah is All-Embracing All-knowing.

    And their prophet said to them: 'the sign of his king ship is that there would come to you an ark in which thereis ranquility of hearts from your Lord, and there are something left of the relics of the respectable Moosa andthe respectable Haroon, the angels raising it would bring. No doubt, in it there is great sign for you if youbelieve

    When Talut aparted taking the armies from the City spoke he: 'no doubt Allah is to test you with a stream.Then whoso drinks he is not mine, and whose drinks not, he is mine, but he who takes a sip with his hand,then all drank of it except a few of them. Again when Talut and the Muslim with him went across the streamspoke, 'we have no power against Jalut and his armies'. Those who were sure to meet Allah spoke, 'that oftena small party has triumphed over a large party by Allah's Command, and Allah is with the steadfast.

    Again when they came across Jalut and his armies, they submitted: 'O our Lord pour forth steadfastness uponus and make our steps firm, and help us against disbelieving people.

    Then they routed them by the Command of Allah and Daud slew Jalut and Allah gave him Kingdom andwisdom and taught him what He pleased. And if Allah would not repel some of them by some others amongpeople, then necessarily the earth, would have been ruined, but Allah is Munificent to entire, world.

    These are the verses of. Allah, that O beloved! We recite correctly to you and you are no doubt one of theMessengers.

    These are messengers! That in them We caused one to excel upon the other: to some of them Allah spoke:and some one is he who was raised high in degrees over-all, and We gave clear signs to Isa son of Marium andaided him with holy spirit and had Allah so willed, then those who came after them would not have foughtamong themselves after the clear signs had come to them. But they differed, some of them remained faithfuland some became disbeliveers and if Allah so willed, they would not have fought; but Allah does whatever Hedesires.

    O Believers! Spend in the way of Allah out of what We have given you before coming of the Day in which thereis neither trafficking not friendship and nor intercession for infidels and the infidels are themselves the personsunjust.

    Allah is; none is to be worshiped save Him, He is Himself Alive and Sustainer of others. Slumber seizes Him not,nor sleep. To Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever in the earth. Who is he that wouldintercede with Him save by His leave. Knows He what is before them and what is behind them and they getnothing of His knowledge save what He desires. The heaven and earth are contained in His Throne and theirguarding is not a burden for Him and He is the only Exalted, the Supreme.

    There is no compulsion in religion; no doubt the virtuous path has become clearly distinct from the erring; thenwhoso does not accept devil and believes in Allah, he grasped a very firm knot which is never to open and AllahHears and Knows.

    Allah is the Protector of Muslims; brings them out from darkness towards light and the supporters of infidelsare devils, and they bring them forth from light towards darkness. They are the people of hell, they are toabide therein.

    O Beloved (Prophet)! Had you not seen him who quarrelled with Ibrahim about his Lord because Allah gavehim Kingdom? When Ibrahim said, my Lord is He who gives life and causes death, said he, 'I give life andcause death'. Ibrahim said, 'Well, Allah brings sun from East: bring it you from the West. 'Thereupon theinfidels were confounded and Allah guides not the unjust people.

    Or like him who passed by a town and it was laid down fallen upon its roofs. Spoke he, 'How Allah shall givelife to it after its death. Then Allah kept him died for a hundred years; then gave him life. Said, He! 'How longyou stayed here, submitted he 'I would have stayed a full day or a little less.' He said, 'No you have passed ahundred years, and look at your food and drink; they are not stinked as yet and look at your ass whose boneseven are not safe. And this is that We may make you a sign for the people. And look at these bones how, Weset them up, then cover them with flesh. When this matter became clear to him, said, 'I know very well thatAllah is Potent over all things.

    And when Ibrahim submitted, 'O my Lord, show me how You shall give life to the dead.' Said He, 'do you notbelieve.' Submitted he, 'why not, but I like that my heart may be at rest. 'Said He, 'then well, taking four birds,make them familiar to you, then put a part of each of them on each hill, thereafter call them they will come toyou running with their feet. And know that Allah is Mighty, Wise.

    The example of those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah is like that of a grain which caused to growseven ears and in each ear one hundred grains and Allah may increase more than that for whomsoever Hepleases; and Allah is Bountiful, All-knowing.

    Those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah, then after spending neither boast of favours conferred norinjure, their reward is with their Lord, and they shall have no fear, nor any grief.

    To speak kind word and to forgive is better than that; charity followed by injury. And Allah is above want,Clement.

    O Believers! Void not your charities by boasting of your favours conferred and injuring, like him who spent hiswealth for showing to people and believes not in Allah and Last Day. Then the example of him is like that of asmooth rock on which is dust of earth; now a heavy rain fell upon it leaving it a bare stone. They shall have nocontrol on anything of what they have earned and Allah guides not the infidels.

    And the example of those who spend their wealth in seeking the pleasure of Allah and for strengthening theirhearts is like that garden which is on an elevated ground; a heavy rain fell upon it then it brought forth itsfruits two fold; again if a heavy rain reaches it not, then dew suffices. And Allah is seeing what you do.

    Would any one of you like it that he would have a garden of dates and grapes beneath which rivers would havebeen flowing; for him, there is every kind of fruit in it, and old age came to him and he has weak children, thencame a whirlwind on it in which there was fire, so it was burnt? Thus Allah explains to you His signs, so thatyou may ponder.

    O Believers! Give something of your pure earnings and of what We produce from the earth for you; and intendnot to give especially vile of it, whereas if you get of it, you will not accept unless you close your eyes in it. Andknow that Allah is free of all wants, Praiseworthy.

    The devil dreads you of destitution and commands you of lewdness, and Allah promises you forgiveness andabundance. And Allah is All-Embracing All-Knowing.

    Allah grants wisdom to whom He pleases and he who got wisdom indeed got abundant good; and noneaccepts counsel but men of under" standing.

    And whatsoever you spend or vows Allah knows it and the unjust have no helpers.

    If you give charity openly then what a good thing it is; and if you give to beggars hidingly it is better for youthan every thing, and He will remove some of your sins. And Allah is Aware of what you do.

    To guide them is not your responsibility; yes Allah guides whomsoever He pleases. And whatsoever good thingyou give it is for your own good, and it is not proper for you to spend but for seeking pleasure of Allah andwhatever of wealth you give, you will get back in full and you shall not be wronged.

    For those beggars who are detained in the way of Allah, they cannot move about in the earth. The ignorantman thinks them wealthy because of their restraint. You shall recognise them from their faces; they do not begof men importunately. And whatever you give in charity Allah knows it.

    Those who spend their wealth (in charity) in the night and in the day secretly and openly. They have theirreward with their Lord. There is neither any fear nor any grief to them.

    Those who devour interest shall not stand on the Day of judgement, but like the standing of one whom the evilspirit has by touching made mad. This is because they said 'The trade too is like interest,' and Allah made tradelawful and made interest unlawful. So he, who received admonition from his Lord and refrained, then whateverhe took before is lawful to him, and his affair is with Allah. And now whoever shall commit such. Fault, they aremen of hell, they will live therein for longer period.

    Allah destroys interest and increases charity and Allah loves not any ungrateful big sinner.

    No doubt, those who accepted faith and did good deeds and established prayer and paid the Zakat, (poor-due)their reward is with their Lord and there is neither any fear nor any grief to them.

    O Believers! Fear Allah and leave what remains of interest if you are Muslims.

    But if you do not do like this, then be sure of war from Allah and the Messenger of Allah. And if you repentthen take your principal sums, neither you wrong any one nor be wronged yourselves.

    And if the debtor is a man in hardship then give him time till it is easy, and to remit the debt fully is better foryou if you know.

    And fear the day in which you shall be made to return to Allah and shall every soul be paid in full what it hasearned and they shall not be wronged.

    O Believers! When you enter in the transaction of any debt for a fixed period, then write it down. And a scribeshould write between you justly; and the scribe should not refuse to write as he has been taught by Allah, thenhe should write and let him on whom. The liability falls dictate and fear Allah Who is his Lord and leaves notbehind something out of the liability. Then again he on whom liability falls be of low understanding or be weakor be unable to dictate; then let his guardian dictate justly. And make two witnesses from among your men,then if two men be not available then a man and two women such witnesses, as you like, so that either of thetwo women errs in memory, then the other may remind to that one. And when the witnesses are called, theyshould not refuse to come. And do not take it as a burden, the liability be it small or big, write it down alongwith its fixed period. It is juster in the sight of Allah, in it the evidence will be more suitable and it is nearer to itthat you may not be in doubt; save a ready merchandise which you give or take from hand to hand, there is nosin on you, if you write it not. And when you trade, make witnesses. And neither any scribe be harmed nor thewitness (or neither the scribe do harm nor the witness). And if you do such then it would be yourinsubordination. And fear Allah and Allah teaches you and Allah knows everything.

    And if you are on a journey, and you find not a scribe then let there be pledge with possession. And if inbetween you one entrusts the other, then let he whom he trusted deliver his trust and fear Allah Who is hisLord and conceal not evidence; and whosoever would conceal evidence, then his heart is sinful from inside,and Allah knows your deeds.

    To Allah belongs what" ever is in the heaven and whatever is in the earth; and if you disclose whatever is inyour heart or keep it hidden, Allah will call you to account for it; then He will forgive whomsoever He pleasesand punish whomsoever He pleases, and Allah is Potent over every thing.

    The Messenger believed in that which was sent down to him from his Lord and the believers all accepted Allahand His angels and His Books and His messengers saying this, 'that we do not differentiate in the matter ofhaving faith in any of His messengers' and submitted that we heard and obeyed. Let there be your forgiveness,O our Lord! And to you is our return.

    Allah places not burden on any soul but to the extent of his strength whatever good it earned is useful for itand whatever bad it earned is a loss for it. O our Lord! Catch not us if we forget or miss the mark! O our Lord!And place not heavy burden on us as you had placed on those before us. O our Lord! Put not that burden onus of which we have no strength to bear! And pardon us and forgive and have mercy on us. You are ourMaster; then help us against the infidels.


====






    Alif. Lam Mim.

    Allah is. Beside Whom none is to be worshiped. Self-Living, Sustainer of others.

    He sent down to you this true Book, confirming preceding Books, and He sent down Tawrat and Injil beforethis.

    A for time guiding the people and sent down the criterion; No doubt, for those who denied the Signs of Allah isthe severe torment and Allah the Mighty, is Possessor of the power of retribution.

    Nothing is hidden from Allah, neither in the earth nor in the heaven.

    It is He Who forms your shape in the wombs of the mothers as He pleases. Besides Whom none is to beworshiped the Dominant, the Wise.

    It is He Who sent down upon you the Book, in which some verses have clear meaning, they are the substanceof the Book, and others are those, in the meaning of which there is doubt. Those in whose hearts there isperversity pursue doubtful one desiring deviation and searching their own viewpoint of it, and its rightinterpretation is known to Allah alone. And those of firm knowledge say, 'We believed in it, all is from our Lordand none accept admonition save men of understanding.

    'O our Lord! Let not our hearts become perverse after this that You guided us and bestow on us mercy fromYourself; no doubt, You are the big Bestower.

    'O our Lord! No doubt You are the assembler of all people for the Day in which there is no doubt. Undoubtedlythe promise of Allah changes not.

    No doubt, those who became infidels; their riches and their children shall avail them nothing against Allah andit is they who are the fuel of the hell.

    Like the people of Pharaohs and those before them, they belied our Signs; then Allah seized them for their sinsand Allah's punishment is severe.

    Say to the disbeliveers, 'soon you shall be overcome and be driven towards the hell and that is an evil bed'.

    No doubt, there was a sign for you in two groups that encountered among themselves. One gang fighting inthe way of Allah and the other disbeliveers that they understood them double of themselves in their eyesight;and Allah strengthens with His help whom He pleases. No doubt, in it there is teaching after seeing for the menof understanding.

    Adorned for men is the love of these lusts, women and children and the stored up heaps of gold and silver andbranded horses and cattle and crops. This is the capital of living world; and it is Allah with Whom there is anexcellent destination.

    Say you 'shall I inform you of something better than that.' For pious ones there are gardens with their Lordbeneath which rivers flow therein shall they abide, and pure wives and Allah's pleasure. And Allah sees Hisbondsmen.

    Those who say, 'Our Lord we did accept faith, then forgive us our sins and save us from the torment of thehell.'

    The steadfast and truthful and humble and those who spend in the way of Allah and those who seekforgiveness in the latter part of the night.

    Allah bore witness that none is to be worshiped save He, and the angels and the men of learning (too)standing with justice; none is to be worshiped save He, the most Reverend, Wise.

    Verily, only Islam is the Din (Religion) before Allah, and the men of Book did not dissent but after theknowledge had come to them, because of their hearts burning. And whoso denies the signs of Allah; then nodoubt Allah is to call to account very soon.

    Again O beloved! If they argue with you, then say 'I have submitted my face before Allah and those whofollowed me; and say to the men of Books and to those who read not; 'have you submitted'? Hence if theysubmit, then they got the guidance and if turn their faces, then upon you it is only to convey the message, andAllah is seeing His bondsmen.

    Those who deny the signs of Allah, and slay the Prophets unjustly and kill the men ordering justice; give themgood tiding of painful torment.

    These are they whose deeds have perished in this world and the next and they shall have no helpers.

    Have you not observed those given a portion of the Book are being called to the Book of Allah that it mayjudge between them, then a faction of them turns away being opposed to it?

    This boldness came to them because they say, 'The fire shall not touch us except for a number of days'; andthe lies which they used to invent deceived them in their religion.

    Then how will it be, when We shall gather them for a Day in which there is no doubt; and every soul shall bepaid in full what it has earned and they shall not be wronged.

    Say like this, 'O Allah Master of the Kingdom, You give the Kingdom to whom You please; and seize theKingdom from whom You please. And you exalt whom You please and You abase whom You please; in Yourhand is all good. No doubt You can do all things.

    You cause the night to enter into day and cause the day to enter into night, and bring forth the living from thedead and bring forth the dead from the living, and provide whomsoever You please with out reckoning

    Let not the Muslims takes infidels as their friends besides the Muslims and whosoever shall do that he has noconnection with Allah, but this that have some fear of them; and Allah cautions you from His wrath; and untoAllah is the return.

    Say, you, 'whether you conceal what is in your hearts or declare it, Allah knows all; and knows whatever is inthe heavens and whatever is in the earth. And Allah has the authority over every thing.'

    The day when every soul shall find presented whatever it did of good and whatever it did of evil; it will long,would there be a far distance between it and me. And Allah warns you of His torment; and Allah is Kind enoughover His bondsmen.

    'O beloved! Say you, 'O people! If you love Allah, then follow me; Allah will love you and forgive your sins andAllah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    Say you, 'Obey Allah and the messenger; then if they turn their faces, then Allah loves not the infidels.

    No doubt, Allah chose Adam and Noah and the family of Ibrahim and the family of Imran from over the entireworld.

    It is a race from one another. And Allah Hears and Knows.

    When the wife of Imran said, My lord! 'I make a vow to You, for what is in my womb to remain purely in Yourservice. There fore accept this from me, no doubt, You alone are Hearing, Knowing.

    Then when she gave birth to her, she said, 'O my Lord I have given Birth to a female. And Allah knows wellwhatever she had given birth to and that male whom she demanded was not like this female and I have namedher Mary, and I give her and her off-spring under Your protection from Satan the rejected.

    Therefore her Lord accepted her graciously and caused her to grow an excellent growth and gave her underthe guardianship of 'Zakaria'. Whenever Zakaria went to her place of prayer, he found new provision with her.He said! O Mary! Whence came this to you? She spoke, 'that is from Allah,' No doubt, Allah gives whomsoeverHe pleases without measure.

    Here Zakaria called his Lord, said, 'O my Lord! Give me from Yourself pure offspring; no doubt, You only arethe Hearer of prayers.

    Then the angels called him and he was offering prayer standing at his place of worship, no doubt Allah givesyou glad tidings of Yahya who shall confirm a word from Allah, a chief and chaste and prophet from amongstOur righteous.

    Said, 'O my Lord! From where shall I have a son, while the old age has reached to me and my wife is barren'.Said, 'Allah does so whatever He pleases'.

    Submitted he, O my Lord! 'Appoint a token for me' Said, your token is this that you shall not speak to peoplefor three days but with signals, and remember your Lord much and praise Him at a time nearing sunset and atdawn.

    And when the angels said, 'O Mary; verily Allah has chosen you and purified well ' and today has chosen youfrom amongst the women of all worlds'.

    'O Mary! Stand before your Lord humbly and prostrate for Him and bow down with those who bow down.

    These are the tidings of unseen that We reveal to you in secret. And you were not with them when they drewlots with their pen that under whose guardianship Mary should be given, and you were not with them whenthey were disputing.

    And remember when the angels said to Mary, 'O Mary! Allah gives you glad tidings of a word from Him, whosename is Masih, Isa son of Mary, he shall be dignified in the world and the Hereafter and of those nearest toAllah.

    And he shall talk to the people in the cradle and in the ripe age (Maturity) and shall be of the righteous.

    She said, 'O my Lord! From where shall I have a son no person has touched me. Said He, "Allah creates in sucha way what He pleases". When He decrees any thing, then He only says to it 'Be! And it is.

    And Allah will teach him the Book and wisdom and the Taurat and Injeel.

    And he shall be a Messenger towards the children of Israel saying this, 'I have brought to you a sign from yourLord; that I make a form out of clay like a bird for you then again breathe in it and it becomes a bird atonce bythe command of Allah; and I heal the born blind and the leper and I make the dead alive by the command ofAllah and tell to you whatever you eat and what you store in your houses. No doubt, in these things there is agreat sign for you if you believe.

    And I have come confirming the book Taurat that was before me; and for this that I should make lawful someof those things which were forbidden to you; and I have brought to you a sign from your Lord then fear Allahand obey my command.

    No doubt Allah is the Lord of me, of yours, of all so worship Him only. This is the straight path.

    Then again when Isa found infidelity in them, said, 'who become my helpers towards Allah'. The disciples said,'We are the helpers of the religion of God; We have believed in Allah and bear you witness that we areMuslims.

    'O our Lord! 'We believe in what you have sent down and followed the Messenger, then write us among thosewho bear witness on truth.'

    And the infidels plotted and Allah secretly devised for their destruction and Allah is the best of secret devisers.

    Remember, when Allah said; O Isa! I shall cause you to reach to your full life and I shall raise you towardsMyself and I shall purify you from the infidels, and shall give your followers superiority over the rejecters untilthe Day of Resurrection then you all shall come returning to Me: then I shall decide between you concerningthat wherein you dispute'.

    Then those who became infidels, I shall torment them with severe punishment in this world and the next andthey shall have no helpers.

    And to those who believed and did good deeds, Allah will pay them their rewards in full and the unjust are notacceptable to Allah.

    Thus, We recite to you of some signs and wise admonition

    The likeness of Isa with Allah, is like Adam. He created him of dust, then said, 'Be and 'he' was atonce.

    'O Listener! This is the truth from your Lord; be not therefore of doubters.

    Then O beloved! Whoever disputes with you about Isa after knowledge has come to you, then tell them, 'come,let us call our sons and your sons our women and your women and our souls and your souls, then let us prayearnestly, and so lay the curse of Allah upon the liars.'

    This verily is the true Narrative; There is none worthy of worship save Allah; and verily only Allah is All Mighty,the All Wise.

    Then if they turn back their faces, then Allah knows the mischief mongers.

    Say you, O people of the Book! Come towards such a word which is common between us and you, that is weworship none but Allah and associate no partner with Him; and none of us make one another as Lord besideAllah; then if they do not accept then say, 'bear witness that we are Muslims.'

    'O people of the Book! Why do you dispute about Ibraham? The Torah and Injil (Gospel) were not sent down,but after him, then have you no reason?

    Behold! you are those who disputed in that of which you had knowledge, then why you dispute in that of whichyou have no knowledge, and Allah knows and you know not.

    Abraham was neither a Jew nor Christian but was a Muslim separate from every falsehood and was not of thepolytheists.

    Verily, the more rightful claimant of Abraham than all people were those who followed him and this prophetand the believers, And Allah is the Protector of the believers.

    A section of the people of the Book yearns that in any way you go astray and they make astray to themselvesand they have no sense.

    'O people of the Book! Why do you deny the signs of Allah, whereas you are yourselves witnesses.

    'O people of the Book! Why do you confound truth with falsehood and why do you conceal the truth whereasyou have knowledge?

    A section of the people of the Book said, 'believe in that which has been sent down upon the believers atmorning and deny at evening; perchance they may return'.

    And believe not any but. Him who is the follower of your religion. Say you, 'The guidance of Allah is the onlyguidance of Allah. That may be given to any one the like of that was given to you', or anyone might argue youbefore your Lord. Say, you, 'the bounty is in the hand of Allah alone; He gives it to whomsoever He pleases;and Allah is All-Embracing All-Knowing.

    He singles out with His mercy whomsoever He pleases and Allah is of exceeding bounty.

    Among the people of the Book there is someone with whom if you keep a huge treasure in trust then he willpay it back to you, and in them there is someone, with whom if you keep in trust a single dinar then he will notrepay it to you, except when you remain standing over his head. It is because they say, 'there is noresponsibility over us in the matter of illiterates. And they utter a lie against Allah knowingly.

    Yes, why not, one who fulfilled his pledge and feared God and verily, Allah loves those who fear God.

    Those who accept mean price in exchange of their covenant with Allah and their oaths, they have no portion inthe Hereafter, and Allah will neither speak to them nor look towards them or Resurrection Day, nor will Hepurify them; and for them there is painful torment.

    And among them some are those who distort the Book by twisting their tongues; that you may think it is alsoin the Book, and that is not in the Book. And they say, 'It is from Allah, whereas it is not from Allah and theyforge a lie against Allah purposely and knowingly.

    It is not the right of any man that Allah should give him the Book and command and prophet hood, then heshould say to people, 'Be my bondmen leaving Allah; Yes he will say this, 'Be men of Allah because you teachthe Book and because you study it.'

    And He would not order you this that you should take the angels and prophets as God. Would He order you toinfidelity after it that you have become Muslims?

    And remember when Allah took from the prophets their covenant whatever I should give you of the Book andwisdom then comes to you the Messenger confirming your Books, then assuredly you shall believe in him andassuredly you help him. He said, 'do you agree, and do you accept My heavy responsibility on it. All submitted'We did affirm, He said, 'then be witness against one another and I am myself among witnesses with you.

    Now whoso turns away after this, then they are the dis-obedients.

    Then, do they like a religion other than the religion of Allah? And to Him has submitted whoso is in the heavensand the earth, willingly and unwillingly, and to Him shall they be returned.

    Say like this, 'that We believed in Allah and in that which was sent down to us and in that which Was sentdown to Ibrahim and Ismail and Ishaque and Yaqoob and his children and that which was given to Moosa andIsa and prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them in believing and to Him wehave bowed down our necks.

    And whoso will desire for a religion other than Islam that shall never be accepted from him and in the nextworld he shall be among the losers.

    How Allah shall wish to guide such a people who disbelieved after believing and had borne witness that theMessenger is true and to whom had come clear signs? And Allah guides not a people unjust.

    Their meed is this that on them there is curse of Allah, and of angels and of men, all together.

    They should abide thereunder. Neither the torment shall be lightened from over them and nor shall they berespited.

    But those who repented thereafter and amended themselves, then necessarily, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    No doubt, those who disbelieved after believing then again wax in infidelity, their repentance shall never beaccepted and these are they who have gone astray.

    Those who disbelieved and died as infidels, there shall never be accepted an earth full of gold from anyone ofthem, though he offers it in ransom for himself. There is painful torment for them, and they shall have nohelpers.

    You shall never attain good unless you spend your favourite things; and Allah knows whatever you spend.

    All food was lawful to the children of Israel; save what Yaqoob had made unlawful for himself before theTaurah wee sent down. Say you, bring the Taurat and read it if you are truthful?

    Then after that, whose forges lie against Allah, those are the persons unjust.

    Say you, 'Allah is true therefore follow the religion of Ibraham Who was separate from every falsehood, andwas not of the polytheists.

    Verily, the first House among all marked for the worship o, the people is that which is in Mecca abounding inblessing and a guide of all world.

    Therein are clear signs; the place where Ibraham stood and whosoever enters it, is in security. And for thesake of Allah, the people is to perform pilgrimage to this House, who could find a way thither. And who denies,then Allah is independent of entire world.

    Say you, 'O people of Book! Why not you accept the signs of Allah while your works are before Allah.

    Say you, 'O people of the Book! Why do you hinder those who accepted the faith from the path of Allah, youdesire to crook it and you are yourself witness thereof? And Allah is not unaware of your doings.

    'O believers! If you obey some of the people of the Book, then they would render you infidels after your belief.

    And how would you commit infidelity, (whereas) to you are recited the signs of Allah; and in your midst hascome the Messenger of Allah? And he who sought the support of Allah has been directed to a straight path.

    'O believers! Fear Allah, as rightly He is to be feared, and do not die ever save as Muslims.

    And hold fast, all together, by the rope of Allah, and be not divided among themselves. And remember Allah'sfavour upon you. Remember when there was enmity among you, He joined your hearts together then, by Hisgrace, you became brothers together and you were upon the brink of a pit of Fire, then He rescued you fromit; Thus Allah explains to you His signs; that haply you may act guidance.

    And let there be such a group among you, that they may call towards goodness and command what is just andforbid evil. And the very same attained to their goals.

    And be not like those who were divided (in sections) and disagreed among themselves, after this that brightsigns had come to them and for them there is mighty torment.

    On the day when some faces shall be white, and some black. Then those whose faces: have been blackened,(they will be told) 'did you become infidels after accepting faith? Then now taste the torment, the recompenseof your infidelity.

    And as for those, whose faces are whitened, they are under the mercy of Allah; they shall abide in it.

    These are the signs of Allah that We recite unto you correctly, and Allah intends not injustice to the people ofthe worlds.

    And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth and unto Allah is the return of allmatters.

    You are the best among all those nations appeared unto mankind, you command! To good, and forbid evil, andkeep faith unto Allah. Had the people of the Book believed, then it was good for them. Some of them areMuslims and most of them are infidels.

    They will not harm you save annoying; and if they fight with you, they will turn their backs from you, thenagain they will not be helped.

    Ignominy has been pitched on them, wherever they are, they shill get no security save a rope from Allah and arope from men, (they may get protection). They became worthy of the wrath of Allah and on them destitutionhave been pitched. This is because they used to reject the signs of Allah and slay the prophets unjustly. This isbecause they were disobedient and transgressors.

    All are not alike. Among the people of the Book some are those who stand right, recite the signs of Allah in thehours of night and prostrate.

    They believe in Allah and the Last Day and command good and forbid evil and run for good works, and theyare righteous.

    And those who will do good, their rights shall not be denied and Allah knows the God fearing.

    Those who became infidels, their riches and children shall not avail them at all against Allah and they are themen of hell and shall abide therein.

    The example of that which they spend in the life of this world is like a wind in which there is intense cold; thatstrikes the harvest of such a nation which wronged themselves, therefore it destroyed that, and Allah wrongedthem not, but yes, they wrong unto their own souls.

    'O believers! Do not make strangers as your confidants; they leave no stone unturned in harming you. Theyyearn for what distresses you: Hostility appeared from their utterances and what they have concealed in theirbreasts is yet greater. We have made you hear Our signs clearly, if you have wisdom.

    Behold, it is you who love them, and they love you not. Though you believe in all the Books. And when theymeet you, they say, 'we accepted faith', and when they are alone, then they bite their fingertips at you out ofwrath. Say you, die in your passion' Allah knows well the thoughts of the hearts.

    Anything good befall you it vexes them; and an evil be fall you, then they are happy at it, and if you havepatience. And fear Allah, then their guile will not hurt you at all. Verily, their all doings are under the'circumference of Allah.

    And remember O beloved! When you came out from your house in the morning, I am assigning to the Muslimstheir positions for battle. And Allah is All-Hearing All-Knowing.

    When two of your groups intended Cowardice, but Allah is their supporter, and upon Allah should the Muslimsrely.

    And verily, Allah did help you at Badr, when you were resourceless. So fear Allah that perhaps you may bethankful.

    When O beloved! You did say to Muslim 'Is it not enough for you that your Lord should assist you by sendingdown three thousand angels?

    Yes, why not, if you have patience and fear God, and the infidels came upon you instantly, then your Lord willsend five thousand angels with marks for your help.

    And this victory Allah did not make, save for pleasing you and so that your hearts might get rest with it, thereis no help except from Allah, the Dominant, the Wise.

    In order that He might cut a portion of the infidels or abase them, so that they may go back dis-appointed.

    This matter is not in your hand, whether He shows His graciousness to them for repent fence or torment them,for they are unjust.

    And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth. He Forgives whomsoever andtorments whomsoever He pleases; and Allah is For giving Merciful.

    'O believers! Devour not interest, doubled and redoubled; and fear Allah, in the hope that you may getprosperity.

    And Ward off the Fire which is already prepared for the infidels.

    And remain obedient to Allah and Messenger, in the hope that you be shown mercy.

    And run towards the forgiveness of your Lord and to such a paradise whose width covers all heavens and earthis already prepared for those who are pious.

    Those who spend in the path of Allah in prosperity and adversity and who restrain anger and who pardon men.And virtuous people are dear to Allah.

    And those who, when they have committed indecency or wronged their own souls, beg forgiveness for theirsins remembering Allah, and who forgives sins save Allah? And do not persist knowingly in what they havedone.

    For such the recompense is their 'Lord's forgiveness and Gardens with rivers flowing underneath, they shallremain for ever therein, and what an excellent reward is for workers.

    Some systems have already been experimented, before you, then see, going through the earth, how was theend of the beliers! (Who did deny)?

    This is to state to people and to guide and is admonition to those who are pious.

    And be not sluggish and neither be grieved, you are the very same who shall overcome if you have faith.

    If any distress has come to you, then they too have already received a similar distress. These are the days inwhich we have fixed turns for the people and that is because Allah may make one to distinguish the believesand may assign some of you the position of martyrs. And Allah loves not the unjust.

    And so that Allah may purify the Muslims and wipe out the infidels.

    Are you in this supposition that you shall enter the paradise and yet Allah has not tested your warriors andneither has experimented the steadfast?

    And you used to long for death before meeting it, so now you have seen it with your eyes.

    And Muhammad is only a Messenger. There have been many other messengers before him. Will you then, if hedeparts or be slain, turn back on your heels? And he, who will turn back on his heels, shall not harm Allah atall. And very soon Allah will recompense the thankful.

    And no soul can die save by the leave of God -the time of all is already recorded. And whoso desires thereward of the world, We gave to him of this, and he who desires the reward of the Hereafter, We give to himof this, And it is very soon, We may recompense the thankful.

    And many a prophet fought, with them there were many god-men, they fell not sluggish with the miseries theyfaced in the path of Allah, and neither became weak nor gave in. And the steadfast are dear to Allah.

    They did say nothing save this prayer, 'O Our Lord! Forgive our sins and our excesses that we committed in ouraffairs, and make firm our steps and help us against these disbelieving people.

    So Allah gave them the reward of the world, and goodness of the reward of Hereafter. And the good-doers aredear to Allah.

    'O believers! If you follow the line of infidels, then they will turn you upon your heels, and you will be backafter losing.

    Whereas Allah is your Patron; and He is the best Helper.

    Soon We shall cast terror in the hearts of infidels, because they associated partners with Allah for which Hesent down not any understanding and their abode is Fire, and what is the evil abode of the unjust.

    And verily, Allah did prove the truth of His promise to you when you were killing the infidels by His leave, untilwhen you showed weakness and quarrelled about the order and Dis-obeyed after He had shown you the thingyou desired for. Of you some one desired the world and of you some one desired the Hereafter, then Heturned your faces from them that He might; test you; and no doubt, He forgive you and Allah is Bounteousover Muslims.

    When you were going up and did not look back towards anyone and Our Messenger was calling you in anothergroup, therefore He gave you, sorrow in recompense for a sorrow, and forgave in order that you might notgrieve for what sent out of your hand and what befell you. And Allah is informed of your doings

    Then after sorrow, He sent down to you slumber that had surrounded a party of you, and another party wasanxious about themselves, suspected of Allah unjustly; like the suspicion of Ignorance. They say, 'Have we anypower in this affair'? Say you, 'entire authority is of Allah. They conceal in their hearts that they reveal not untoyou; they say, 'if we had any power, then we would not have been killed here." Say you, 'If you had been inyour houses, even then those for whom killing was already written would have gone forth to the place of theirslaughter; and in order that Allah might test the feelings of your breasts, and whatever is in your hearts mightpurge it. Allah knows the thoughts of your hearts.

    No doubt, those of you who turned back on the day when two armies met. It was Satan who made them slipbecause of their certain actions, and surely Allah forgave them. Verily, Allah is Forgiving, Gentle.

    'O believers! Be not like those infidels who told about their brothers when went on journey or on holy war; thathad they been with us, they would not have died and not been slain, in order that Allah may make it a cause ofregret in their hearts. And Allah gives life and causes death and Allah is seeing your works.

    And undoubtedly, if you are slain in the way of Allah or die, then the forgiveness of Allah and His mercy arebetter than their entire wealth.

    And if you die or be slain, certainly you are to gather towards Allah.

    Then, it is of the mercy of Allah that O beloved! You became gentle for them and if you had been hot headed,hard hearted, then they certainly would have dispersed from your circle, so pardon them and intercede forthem and consult them in the affairs; and when you have made up your mind for any thing, then put your trustin Allah. Undoubtedly the trustful are dear to Allah.

    If Allah helps you, then none can overcome you; and He forsakes you, then who is such that can help youagain. And Muslim should have trust unto Allah alone.

    It cannot be thought about any prophet that he hides away something and whatever he hides away, he shallcome with his hidden thing on the Day of Resurrection; then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned,and there shall be no injustice unto them.

    Will then he who follows the pleasure of Allah be like him who has earned the wrath of Allah and his abode ishell? And what a bad place of returns it is.

    They are according to their ranks near Allah and Allah sees their works.

    Undoubtedly, Allah did a great favour to the Muslims that in them from among themselves sent a Messengerwho recites unto them His signs and purifies them and teaches them the Book and wisdom, and necessarilybefore that they were certainly in apparent error.

    What! When any calamity reaches you, though double of which you had caused to reach (to them), you beganto say, "Whence it came". Say you; 'It is from your own side'. Undoubtedly Allah can do everything.

    And that calamity which befell you on the day the two armies had met was by Allah's leave, and thus He mightmake known the believers.

    And that He might make one to distinguish the hypocrites and it was said to them, "come, fight in the way ofAllah or drive out the enemy". They said, "If we knew fighting, then certainly we would have sided you." Andthey on that day were nearer to apparent infidelity than to expressed faith. They say with their mouths, what isnot in their hearts. And Allah knows what they are concealing.

    Those who said about their brothers and while them selves remained behind, 'Had they obeyed us, they wouldnot have been killed.' Say you, 'then avert your own death if you are truthful.'

    And those who have been slain in the way of Allah never think of them as dead; but they are alive with theirLord, get their subsistence.

    They are happy because of that which Allah has bestowed upon them of His Bounty and are rejoicing for theirsuccessors who have not yet joined them that on them there is not any fear, nor any grief.

    They rejoice at the favour of Allah and His bounty, and that Allah wastes not the reward of Muslims.

    Those who responded to the call of Allah and Messenger after the wound had smitten them There is greatreward for their righteous and reverent people.

    Those to whom people said, 'the people have gathered against you, 'therefore fear them; but this increasedtheir faith and said, 'Allah is sufficient for us and what an excellent Disposer of Affairs.

    Hence, they returned with a favour from Allah and His Bounty, no evil touched them and followed the pleasureof Allah. And Allah is of great, Bounty.

    It is only the Satan that threatens you of his friends: so fear them not and fear Me if you have faith.

    And (O beloved) you grieve not of them at all, who run after infidelity, they will not harm Allah at all. And Allahintends not to assign any position for them in the Hereafter and for them, there is great torment.

    Those who purchased infidelity for faith will not harm Allah at all, and for them is the painful torment.

    And let never the unbelievers suppose that the respite, We grant them is some thing good for them. Certainly,We grant them respite only because they may further increase in sin. And for them is the degrading torment.

    Allah is not to leave the Muslims in the present state of affairs in which you are, until He separates unpure fromthe pure. (Wicked from the good) And it is not befitting to the dignity of Allah that O general people! He let youknow the unseen. Yes, Allah chooses from amongst His messengers whom He pleases. Then believe in Allahand His messengers. And if you accept faith and fear, then there is great reward for you.

    And let not those who are niggardly with respect to what Allah has given them out of His bounty think that it isgood for them; on the contrary it is bad for them. Soon that for which they were niggardly shall be theirnecklace on the Day of Resurrection. And only Allah is the Heir of heavens and earth and Allah is aware of yourdoings.

    Undoubtedly Allah heard those who said, "Allah is needy and we are rich." Now We shall put their sayings andtheir slaying of the prophets unjustly in writing; and We shall say, 'taste the torment of the fire.'

    This is the compensation of what your hands have sent forth. And Allah does not oppress their bondsmen.

    Those who say, 'Allah has covenanted with us that we believe not in any messenger until he brings an order ofsuch sacrifice which the fire consumes; say you, 'Many messengers came to you before me bearing clear signsand with this order which you speak of, then why did you kill them, if you are truthful?

    Then O beloved! If they belie you even, so the messengers before you, who had come bearing clear signs andthe scriptures and the shining Book have already been belied.

    Every soul is to taste the death; and you will get your compensation in full only on the Day of Resurrection.Whosoever is saved from the Fire and made to enter into Paradise, attained to his goal. And the life of thisworld is but the goods of deception.

    Undoubtedly, you shall certainly be tested in your property and in your lives. And undoubtedly, you shallcertainly hear a good deal of bad things from the people of the Book before you and from idolaters. But if youendure and guard yourselves (against evils), then it is the work of strong determination.

    And remember when Allah took a covenant from those who were given the Book that, 'you shall necessarilymake it known to the people and congeal it not, but they threw it behind their backs, and took a mean price inExchange of it, then how an evil Purchasing it is!

    Never think of those who rejoice on their doings and wish that they may be praised without doing. Never thinkof such people away from the torment and for them is the painful torment.

    And to Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and earth; and Allah is Potent over every thing.

    Undoubtedly, in the creation of heavens and earth and in the mutual alternation of night and day, there aresigns for men of understanding.

    Who remember Allah standing and sitting and lying on their sides, and contemplate in the creation of heavensand earth; (saying) "O our Lord! You have not made it invain, Hallowed be You, You save us from the tormentof the Hell.

    'O our Lord! Verily whomsoever you cause to enter the Hell, him You have surely humiliated, and the unjusthave no helpers.

    'O our Lord! We heard a proclaimer that he calls for believing, that believe unto your Lord; then we believed. Oour Lord! Forgive us our sins and wipe off us our evils and cause us to die along with the righteous.

    'O our Lord! And give us that what You have promised to us through Your Messengers; and disgrace us not onthe Day of Resurrection. Undoubtedly You do not break the promise.

    Then their Lord heard their prayer that I certainly waste not the labour of any worker from amongst you, be amale or female, you are one among yourselves. Hence those who emigrated and were driven out from theirhomes, and were tortured in My way and fought and were killed. I shall surely wipe out all their sins and shallsurely cause them to enter into the gardens beneath which flow rivers, a reward from Allah. And with Allahonly there is good reward.

    'O Listener! Let not deceive you the strutting about of the infidels in the cities.

    A brief enjoyment; their abode is the Hell and what an evil bed!

    But those who fear their Lord, for them there are gardens beneath which flow rivers. They shall abide therein;an entertainment from Allah and that, which is with Allah, is still better for the righteous.

    And undoubtedly, some among the men of the Book are such that they believe in Allah and in what has beensent to you and what have been sent down to them, their hearts are bent towards Allah, do not accept meanprice for the signs of Allah. These are those whose reward is with their Lord; and Allah is swift in takingaccount.

    'O believers! Be patient, and excel in patience with the enemies and guard Islamic country on the border andremain fearing Allah that haply you may be successful.


==================================


4.

 	
     	Home > Quran > Translation In English > Surah An-Nisaa

	
Al-Quran Menu

	Quran Home
	Arabic Text
	Urdu Translation
	English Translation
	Arabic and Urdu
	Arabic and English
	Arabic Urdu English
	Verse by Verse
	Urdu with Tafseer
	Tilawat
	

	
Main Menu

	Home
	Al-Quran
	Ahadees
	Faizan-e-Sunnat
	Duain
	Durood Sharif
	Naat City
	Islamic Books
	Pictures Gallery
	Kalmay
	Beautiful Names
	Contact Us
	

	
Mailing List



	








	
Translation of Quran In English - Surah An-Nisaa





    'O people! Fear your Lord Who created you from a single soul and made its mate from within it, and from thatpair spread many men and women and fear Allah in Whose name you ask for (your rights) and pay attention tothe ties of relationship. Undoubtedly. Allah is watching you all time.

    And give the orphans their property and do not exchange dirty for the clean and consume not their propertymixing it with your property. Undoubtedly, it is a great sin.

    And if you apprehend that you will not be able to do justice to orphan girls, then marry such other women asseem good to you, two, three, four, but if you are afraid that you will not be able to keep two wives on equalterms, then marry one only or captives whom you own. This is nearer to keeping you away from doinginjustice.

    And give the women their dowries willingly. But if they, of their own pleasure of heart remit something of it toyou, then consume it with taste and pleasure.

    And give not to the unwise their property you have, which Allah has made a means of your living and feedthem therewith and clothe them and speak to them good words.

    And remain testing the orphans, until they are able to marry; then if you find them of right understanding,deliver to them their property and consume it not in extravagance and in such haste that they should not reachtheir maturity. And whose is not needy, let him abstain and whoso is needy, let him consume it with equity. Butwhen you deliver them their property, then take witnesses against them. And Allah is sufficient in takingaccount.

    For men there is share in what their parents and relatives have left behind, and for women there is share inwhat their parents and relatives have left behind, be the bequest little or be it much, it is a share estimated,determined.

    But if at the time of division, the relatives and the orphans and the needy come, then give them too somethingtherefrom and speak to them good words.

    And let those fears, who if they had to leave behind them weak offspring, would have been afraid for them, sothey should be afraid of Allah and speak the upright speech.

    Those who consume the property of orphans unjustly, they fill in their belies with fire only, and they shall soonenter into the flaming fire.

    Allah commands you concerning your children, the share of male is equal to the share of two females; then ifthere be daughters only, though more than two, then for them is two third of what is left, and if there be onlyone daughter, for her is one half. And for each of the parents of the deceased is one sixth of what is left, ifthere be a child of the deceased, but if he has no child and leaves parents, then for the mother is one third;but if there be his many sisters and brothers, then for the mother is one sixth, after any bequest which hasbeen made and debts. Your fathers and your sons, you know not which of them will be more profitable to you.This is fixed proportion from Allah. Undoubtedly Allah is All Knowing, Wise.

    And for you is one-half of what is left by your wives, if they have no issue (child) but if they have issue (child),then you have one fourth of what they leave after (paying) any bequest made by them and the debts. And forthe women is one fourth of what you leave if you have no issue (child); but if you have issue (child), then forthem is one-eight of what you leave after (paying) any bequest made by you and the debts. And if the heritageof any such male or female who leave behind nothing, neither parents nor children is to be divided and frommother side he or she has brother or sister, then for each one of them is one sixth. Then if the sister andbrother be more than one, then all are sharer in one-third, after (payment of the bequest of the deceased anddebts in which the deceased would not have caused any harm. This is an injunction from Allah and Allah is AllKnowing, Gentle.

    These are the limits of Allah and whoso obeys Allah and His Messenger; Allah will make him enter Gardensbeneath which flow rivers will abide therein. And this is the great success.

    And whose disobeys Allah and His Messenger and transgresses His all limits; Allah will cause him to enter theFire, in which he will abide and for him is degrading torment.

    And those of your women who commit adultery; take the evidence of four males specially from amongst youagainst them; then again if they give evidence then confine those women to the houses until death take themor Allah envisages some way for them.

    And those males, female of you commit such act, torture them, then again if they repent and amend, thenleave them alone. Undoubtedly Allah is most Relenting, Merciful.

    The repentance whose acceptance has been under taken by Allah with His own Grace is only for those who doevil ignorantly and then again repent soon after. To wards such people Allah turns with His Mercy; and Allah isKnowing, Wise.

    And that repentance is not neither of those who continue in doing evil until when death comes to anyone ofthem, he says, 'now I repent' nor for those who die as infidels. For them We have prepared a painful torment.

    'O believers! It is not lawful for you to be heir of the women forcibly, and prevent them not with this designthat you may take away part of what you had given them as dower except in this shape that they commit anact of flagrant indecency and treat with them fairly; then if you dislike them, it is likelihood that you may dislikea thing and wherein Allah has placed much good.

    And if you desire to change one wife for another and you have already given her a heap of treasure; then takenot anything thereof. Will you take it by slander and with manifest sin?

    How you shall take it when each of you has already become unveiled before one another and they have takenfrom you a most firm covenant?

    And do not marry those women whom your fathers have married, except what has already passed.Undoubtedly, that is an act of indecency and wrath and an evil way.

    Forbidden to you are your mothers, and your daughters and sisters and your father's sisters and mother'ssisters and your brother's daughters and your sister's daughters, and your mothers who have given suck to youand your foster sisters and the mothers of your wives and daughters (your step daughters) who are in yourcare from the wives with whom you had intercourse but if you had not intercourse with them, then there is noharm in their daughters, and the wives of your sons who are of your loins and to have two sisters togetherexcept what has already passed. Undoubtedly. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    And forbidden to you are the women having husbands save the women of infidels who come in yourpossession. This is the prescription of Allah unto you and the remaining besides those are lawful for you; sothat you seek them in exchange of your properties bringing them in bondage (through marriage) and notdesiring for lust. Therefore, as to those women whom you wish to marry, give them their fixed dowries. Andthere is no sin in what you mutually agree! Upon after fixation. Undoubtedly, Allah is Knowing, Wise.

    And amongst you one who cannot marry free believing women due to insufficient means; then let him marrysuch of the believing handmaids who are the possession of your hands. And Allah knows your faith very wellthe one of you is from the other, therefore, marry them with the leave of their masters and give them theirdowries according to convention bringing them into bondage (through marriage), not desiring for lust, and normaking lovers; when they come under bondage and again commit any act of indecency, then on them thepunishment is half of that, for free women. This is for him who of you are afraid of adultery and it is better foryou to have patience. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    Allah desires to explain to you His commandments and to tell you the ways of those before you and to turn toyou with His Mercy. And Allah is Knowing, Wise.

    And Allah desires to turn to you with His Mercy, and those who follow their lust desire that you should stray faraway from the right path.

    Allah desires to lighten unto you, and man has been created weak.

    'O believers! Consume not unjustly the property of one another among yourselves except it be a trade by yourmutual consent. And kill not yourselves. Undoubtedly, Allah is Merciful to you.

    And whosoever shall do so with excessiveness and injustice, then We shall make him enter into Fire soon: andthat is easy for Allah.

    If you keep away from major sins that are forbidden to you, then We will forgive your other sins and make youenter a place of honour.

    And covet not that whereby Allah has made one of you excel over the other. For men there is share from theirearning, and for women there is share from their earning. And ask Allah for His Grace. Undoubtedly, Allahknows every thing.

    And for every one We have made heirs of the property that is left by parents and relations, and those withwhom you have sworn compact give to them their share, undoubtedly every thing is before Allah.

    Men are incharge over women, because Allah has made one of them excel over another, and because menhave expended their wealth over them, so the virtuous women are submissive, they keep watch in the absenceof husband as Allah commanded to watch. And as to those women whose disobedience you fear, thenadmonish them and sleep apart from them, and beat them (lightly), then if they come under your command,then seek not any way of excess against them. Undoubtedly, Allah is Exalted, Great.

    And if you fear a dispute between husband and wife, then appoint an arbiter from the side of the family of manand an arbiter from the side of the family of woman, if these two will desire reconciliation, then Allah will causeunity between them. Undoubtedly, Allah is knowing, Aware.

    And worship Allah, and do not associate anyone with Him and do good to parents, and to relatives andorphans, and the needy, and the near neighbour and the distant neighbour and the companion of your sideand the wayfarer and to your male and female servants. Undoubtedly, Allah loves not the proud, boastful.

    Those who themselves act miserly and say others to be misers and conceal that which Allah has given them ofHis bounty. And We have prepared for the infidels a degrading torment.

    And those who spend their wealth to show off to men and do riot have faith unto Allah and nor the Last Dayand whose companion has become Satan, then what an evil companion is he?

    And what was the harm, if they would have faith in Allah and the Last Day and spent out of what Allah hasgiven them? And Allah knows them.

    Allah does not do injustice even to the weight of an atom, and if there be a good deed, He doubles it and givesfrom Himself immense reward.

    Then how shall it be, when We bring up a witness from every nation, and O beloved Muhammad! We will bringyou as a witness and a guardian against all those.

    'On that day those who disbelieved and dis-obeyed the Messenger would wish that if the earth were levelledafter burying them in it, and they could not be able to conceal; anything from Allah.

    'O believers! Approach not prayer while you are intoxicated, until you have so much sense that what you say,you understand, nor when you are unclean without taking a bath except when you are travelling; and if youare ailing, or on a journey, or any one of you comes from privy, or you have touched women and you do notfind water, then take some pure earth and wipe there with your faces and your hands. Undoubtedly, Allah isPardoning, Forgiving.

    Have you not seen those who were given a portion of t he Book? They buy error and intend that you too maylose the way.

    And Allah knows well your enemies. And Allah is sufficient as Guardian, and Allah is sufficient as Helper.

    Some of the Jews pervert words from their places; and say, 'We have heard and we disobey, and hear you,continue not making us hear, 'and say RAINA twisting their tongues and taunting in Faith. And if they say thatwe have heard and obeyed, and sir hear our talks and sir look at us, it would have been better for them andmore upright. But Allah has cursed them for their infidelity, so they believe not, save a little.

    'O people of the Book! Believe in what We have sent down confirming the Book with you, before We defacesome faces and turn them on their backs or curse them as We cursed the people of the Sabt (Saturday). Andthe decree of Allah is bound to be carried out.

    Undoubtedly, Allah forgives not that infidelity be done with Him and whatever is less than infidelity forgiveswhomsoever He pleases, And whoso associates partners with Allah has forged a great sin.

    Have you not observed those who declare themselves to be pure? Nay, It is Allah Who purifies whomsoever Hepleases, and they shall not be wronged a single date-thread.

    Behold, how they are forging lie against Allah. And that in itself a sufficient sin.

    Have you not observed those who were given a portion of the Book, believes in idols and demons (Satan) andsay about infidels, 'these are more guided on the way than Muslims.

    These are they whom Allah has cursed. And he whom Allah curses, you shall never find for him any helper.

    Have they some share in the kingdom? It is so then they would not give mankind a speck.

    Or do they envy the people for what Allah has given them out of His bounty? Then We gave the Book andwisdom to the children of Abraham and granted them a great kingdom.

    Then some of them believed in him and some others fumed faces from him and sufficient is Hell, as blazingfire.

    Those who have rejected Our signs, We shall soon cause them to enter Fire. Whenever their skins shall be fullyburnt up, We shall change them with other skins, that they may taste the torment. Undoubtedly, Allah isDominant Wise.

    And those who believed and did good deeds, We shall soon make them enter Gardens beneath which riversflow they shall abide therein for ever. For them there are pure wives, And We cause them to enter a placewhere there shall be shade only shade.

    Undoubtedly, Allah commends you to pay back the trusts to their owners, and that when you judge amongstpeople, judge with justice. Undoubtedly how well Allah admonishes you, verily Allah Hears Sees.

    'O believers! Obey Allah and Obey the messenger, and those who have power of command amongst you, thenagain if there may arise any difference amongst you, refers it to Allah and His messenger, if you have faith inAllah and the Last Day. This is better, and its end is best.

    Have you not observed those, who claim that they believe in what has been sent down to you, and what hasbeen send down before you? Then they wish to make the devil their arbiter, whereas they were commanded toreject him wholly. And Satan desires to lead them far astray.

    And when it is said to them! Come towards the Book sent down by Allah and the messenger then you shall seethat the hypocrites turn away from you averting their faces.

    How shall it be, when any affliction befalls them, for what their hands have sent forth? Then O beloved! Theycome to you swearing by Allah that our object was kindness and concord only.

    Allah knows what is in their hearts then overlook them, and admonish them and say to them convincing wordsconcerning their affairs.

    And We have not sent any messenger, but that he should be obeyed by Allah's will. And if when they doinjustice unto their souls, then O beloved! They should come to you and then beg forgiveness of Allah and themessenger should intercede for them then surely, they would find Allah Most Relenting, Merciful.

    Then O beloved! By your Lord, they shall not be Muslims until they make you judge in all disputes amongthemselves, then they find not any impediment in their hearts concerning whatever you decide, and acceptfrom the eve of their hearts.

    And if We had made it obligatory on them; that 'kill yourselves and go out leaving your hearth and home, thenonly a few of them would have done so; and if they do of what they are advised, then it was better for themand stronger in establishing faith.

    And if it had been so then We would have certainly given them a great reward from ourselves.

    And We would surely have guided them to the straight path.

    And he who obeys Allah and His messenger then he will get the company of those who have been blessed by,Allah, viz. the prophets, and the truthful, and martyrs and the righteous, and what good companions are they.

    This is the bounty from Allah, And Allah is Sufficient Knower.

    'O believers! Take precaution, then march forth towards enemies in bits or go forth all together.

    And among you some one is he, who will indeed tarry behind, then if any calamity comes to you he says, Itwas Allah's favour on me that I was not present with them.

    And if you get bounty of Allah, then he would certainly say, as if there was no friendship between you and him,If I would have gained a great gain.

    Then let them fight in the way of Allah who sell the worldly life for the Hereafter; and whoso fights in the wayof Allah, then he is slain or be He victorious then soon We shall give him a great reward.

    And what happened to you that you fight not in the way of Allah, and for the weak men and women andchildren who are praying, 'O our Lord! Take us out of this town whose people are unjust and give us anydefender from Yourself and give us any helper from Yourself.

    The believers fight in the way of Allah and the infidels fight in the way of the devil, then fight against thefriends of Satan's undoubtedly, the Satan's strategy is weak.

    Have you not observed those to whom it was said 'restrain your hands, and establish prayer and pay thespecified charity (Zakat), then when fighting was made obligatory on them, then some of them began to fearpeople as they should fear Allah or even more than that, And said they 'O our Lord! Why have you prescribedfighting on us, You, would have allowed us to live for a short period'. Say you 'the enjoyment of the world islittle and the Hereafter is better for the god fear, and you shall not be wronged a single thread (a least).

    Wherever you may be, death will overtake you, though if you be in strong forts. And if some good reachesthem, then they say, 'this is from Allah and if some bad reaches them, then they say, 'This has come from you.Say you, 'All is from Allah. Then what happened to them, they seem not to understand anything.

    'O Listener! Whatsoever good reaches to you is from Allah, and whatsoever bad reaches to you is fromyourself. And O beloved! We have sent you, as a Messenger to all mankind and Allah is sufficient Witness.

    Whoso obeys the messenger, has indeed obeyed Allah, and whoso turns away his face, then We have not sentyou to save them.

    And they say, 'We have obeyed, but when they go forth from your presence, then a group of them makes planin the night against what they had said; and Allah writes down their night plan, then O beloved! You overlookthem and trust in Allah. And sufficient is Allah as a Disposer of affairs.

    Then do they not ponder in Quran and if it had been from other than Allah, then they would surely have foundtherein much discrepancy?

    And when there comes to them any matter of satisfaction or of fear, they spread it about, and if they hadreferred it towards the Messenger and their men of authority, then surely they would have known its realityfrom those who investigate and can draw conclusion. And if there had not been the grace of Allah and HisMercy upon you, then surely you would have followed the devil save a few of you.

    Then O beloved! Fight in the way of Allah, you shall not be taxed except for yourself and persuade the Muslimsit is likelihood that Allah would withhold the fierceness of infidels. And the force of Allah is strongest and Historment hardest.

    Whoso makes a good intercession, there is a share in it for him and whoso makes an evil intercession, andthere is a share in it for him. And Allah has power over everything.

    And when you are greeted with any word of greeting then, greet him back with a better word than it or returnthe same. Undoubtedly, Allah is Reckoner of everything.

    Allah is beside whom there is none to be worshiped. And He will certainly gather you on the Day ofResurrection of which there is no doubt. And who is more truthful in his word than Allah.

    And what has happened to you that you are divided into two parties regarding hypocrites? And Allah has upsetthem for their deeds. Do you desire to guide him whom Allah has led? Astray? And whom Allah leads astrayyou shall never find a way for him.

    They wish that you should also become dis-believers as they became disbeliveers, so that you may all becomeequals, then take not anyone of them as your friend unless they leave their homes and 'hearths in the way ofAllah again if they turn faces, then seize them and kill them where ever you find them and take not any ofthem as friends or helpers.

    Except those who are connected with such a people between whom and you there is a pact, or they come toyou because their hearts have no strength to fight against you or fight their own people. And if Allah had sopleased, He would certainly have given them control over you, then they would have surely fought with you. Soif they keep aloof from you and fight you not, and make you an offer of peace, then Allah has opened no wayfor you against them.

    Now you will find some such other who desire, that they may be safe from you and may be safe from theirpeople too, whenever their people turn them towards mischief they fall head long into it then if they do notkeep aloof from you and nor offer you peace and withhold not their hands, seize them and kill them where-ever you find. And these are against whom We have given you clear authority.

    And it is not befitting Muslims to shed the blood of Muslim save by a mischance and he who kills any Muslimunknowingly, then he has to free a Muslim slave and blood compensation to be paid to the family of thedeceased but that they forego. Then if he is from a people who is your enemy and he is himself a Muslim thenthere is only the freeing of a Muslim slave, and if he is from a people between whom and you there is a pact,then the blood compensation be delivered to his family and the freeing of a slave Muslims, but whose handdoes not reach to this (Finds no means to free a slave Muslim) then he should fast for two consecutive monthsthis is his repentance near Allah. And Allah is knowing. Wise.

    And whoso kills a Muslim wilfully, then his recompense is Hell, abiding therein for a long time and Allah's wrathis upon him and has cursed him and has prepared for him a great torment.

    'O believers! When you march forth for a crusade then make proper investigation and he who greets you, saynot to him, 'you are not Muslim, you seek the goods of living world, then with Allah there are spoils abundant.You too were such before, and then Allah conferred His favour on you; so you are duty bound to investigate.Undoubtedly, Allah is aware of what you do.

    Those Muslims who sit aloof from the fighting without excuse and those who strive in the way of Allah withtheir wealth and lives are not equal Allah has exalted in rank those who strive with their wealth and lives overthose who sit aloof. And Allah has promised good to all And Allah has preferred the strivers over the sitters bya great reward.

    From Him, ranks and forgiveness and mercy. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    Those whose souls are taken out by angels while they were wronging themselves the angels say to them, 'whatwere you in'? They say 'We were weak in the land.' they say 'Was not Allah's earth spacious so that you mighthave emigrated in it? Then the abode of such people is Hell. And an evil returning place is that.

    Except those who are suppressed, men and women and children who are unable to devise a plan or of findingany way.

    Then it is likelihood that as for such Allah will pardon. And Allah is Pardoning. Forgiving

    And he who will come out leaving his home and hearth in the way of Allah will find abundant place and spacein the earth. And he who comes out from his home, emigrating cowards Allah and messenger, then deathovertakes him, then his reward lies on Allah And Allah is Forgiving. Merciful.

    And when you journey in the land, there is no sin of you that you offer your some prayer by shortening it, ifyou fear that the infidels will afflict you. Undoubtedly, the infidels are your open enemies.

    And O beloved! (Prophet) when you are amidst them, then lead them in prayer, then let a party of them bewith you and let them take their arms, then when they have finished their prostrations, then moving from therethey should go to your rear; and now let other party who had not participated in the prayer at that time, comeand be your follower in the prayer and let them also take their means of protection and weapons; the infidelswish that in case you become negligent of your arms and your baggage, then once they may fall upon you.And there is no fault upon you, if you are in trouble due to rain or you are sick that you put aside your arms,but you carry your means of protection with you. Undoubtedly, Allah has prepared for the infidels a degradingtorment.

    Then when you have finished your prayer, remember Allah, standing, sitting and dying or your sides; thenwhen you are secure, establish prayer as usual; undoubtedly, the prayer is a fixed time obligation on Muslims.

    And slacken not in seeking infidels, if you are troubled; and you hope from Allah what they hope not. And Allahis knowing, Wise.

    'O beloved! (Prophet) undoubtedly, We have sent down to you the Book with truth that you may judgeamongst people as you are shown by Allah. And quarrel not from the side of deceivers.

    And seek forgiveness of Allah. Undoubtedly Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    And dispute not for those who deceive their souls. Undoubtedly, Allah loves not any big deceitful sinner.

    They hide from men, but hide not from Allah and Allah is with them when they design in their hearts that thingwhich is disliked by Allah. And Allah has encompassed their doings.

    (Do you hear?) it is you who have contended on behalf of them in the life of this world; then who will contendon behalf of them with Allah on the Day of Judgement or who will be their pleader.

    And whoso does evil or wrongs his own soul, thereafter seeks forgiveness of Allah shall find Allah Forgiving, sMerciful.

    And whoso earns sin, then his earning is against his own soul only. And Allah is knowing and Wise.

    And whoso earns, a fault or sin, then casts it upon any innocent, certainly he has borne a calumny and a clearsin.

    And O beloved! (Prophet) If there had not been the grace and mercy of Allah upon you, then some people ofthem had wished to defraud you. And they are misleading themselves only and they will not hurt you inanything. And Allah has sent down to you the Book and Wisdom and has taught to you what you did not knowand great is the grace of Allah upon you.

    There is no good in most of their counsels but whoso commands charity or good things or making peaceamongst people. And whoso does this for seeking the approvals of Allah, We shall soon give him a greatreward.

    And whoso opposes the Messenger after the right way has become clear and follows a way other than the wayof Muslims, We shall leave him on his own conditions and shall cause him to enter Hell; and what is an evilplace of returning.

    Allah forgives not that anyone be associated with Him as partner but whatever is below that He forgives towhomsoever He pleases. And whoso associates with Him any partner has indeed strayed far away.

    These polytheists worship not besides Allah but some females and worship not but a rebel Satan (devil).

    Whom Allah has cursed. And he said, 'I swear, I will certainly take some fixed portion of Your bondmen.

    I swear, I will certainly lead them astray and certainly I will excite in them desires and will certainly say to themthat they would cut the ears of cattle and will certainly bid to them that they would alter the creation of Allah.And he, who takes Satan for a friend beside Allah, has suffered a manifest loss.

    Satan makes them promises and stirs in them desires, 'and Satan makes them not promises but deception.

    Their destination is Hell; they will not find a place to escape therefrom.

    And those who believed and did good deeds, soon We shall cause them to enter gardens beneath which flowrivers abiding therein for ever. Promise of Allah is true and whoso word is more truthful than Allah.

    Neither the work depends on your wishful thinking, nor on the desires of the people of the Book, whoso will doevil shall be requited thereof and he shall not find, besides Allah any protector or helper.

    And whose will do some good deeds, may be a male or female and be a Muslim, then they shell enter Paradise,and they shall not be wronged a bit.

    And whose religion is; better than he who submits his face to Allah and he is a doer of good and follows thefaith of Ibraham who was separate from every falsehood? And Allah took Ibraham for His fast friend.

    And to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens, and all at is in the earth. And over every thing Allah has control.

    And they ask you your verdict concerning women. Say them, Allah gives verdict to you concerning them andthat which is recited to you in Quran concerning the orphan girls whom you give not what is prescribed forthem, and turn your faces from marrying them, and concerning the weak children, and concerning this that youmaintain justice towards orphans. And whatever good you do, then Allah is aware of it.

    And if any woman be afraid of high-handedness or disregard from her husband, then there is no sin on themthat they may reconcile among themselves and reconciliation is best. And the hearts are entangled intogreediness. And if you do good and be god-fearing then Allah is aware of your doings.

    And it would never be possible for you that you keep women on equal footing, how ever much you may desireit then this should not be the case that you should incline wholly towards one side so that you leave othercandling in the midst. And if you do good and be god fearing then undoubtedly, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    And if they both separate, then Allah will make each of you independent from the other out of His bounty AndAllah is Bountiful Wise.

    And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth. And undoubtedly, Allah hasenjoined those who were given the Book before you and you too that remain fearing Allah. But if you commitinfidelity then undoubtedly, to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth. And Allahis Carefree All-Praised.

    And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth. And Allah is sufficient as realDoer.

    'O people! If He pleases, He can take you away, and bring others. And Allah has full power to do this.

    Whoso desires the reward of the world then with Allah is the reward both of the world and of the Hereafter.And Allah is Hearing, Seeing.

    'O believers! Stand firmly for justice, giving witness for Allah, may be therein your own loss, or of your parentsor of your relations. Against whom you be a witness, he be a rich or be a poor, in any case Allah has morepower than any one over them, therefore follow not passion lest you may be far away from justice; and if youdistort or turn your face, then Allah is aware of your doings.

    'O believers! Keep faith in Allah and His Messenger and the Book which He has sent down upon His Messengerand the Book which has been sent down before. And who denies Allah and His angels and His Books and HisMessengers and the Last Day, then certainly he strayed far way.

    Undoubtedly, those who accepted faith, then became infidels, then again accepted faith, then became infidelsthen after increased in infidelity, Allah will never forgive them nor will show them the way.

    Give tidings to the hypocrites that for them is the painful torment.

    Those who take infidels for friends instead of Muslims, Do they seek honour with them then all honour is forAllah.

    And undoubtedly Allah has already sent down to you in the Book that, when you hear the signs of Allah beingdenied and is being ridiculed, then sit not with them until they engage in some other conversation, otherwiseyou would be like them too. Undoubtedly, Allah will gather hypocrites and infidels all in Hell.

    Those who use to watch your position, then if you get victory from Allah, they say, 'Were We not with you, andif the infidels had a share, then they say to them, 'Had we not control over you?' and we protected you fromthe Muslims. Then Allah will decide between you all on the Day of Judgement. And Allah will not make a wayfor the infidels against Muslims.

    Undoubtedly, the hypocrites are likely to deceive Allah in their own conjecture and it is He who will kill themmaking them negligent, and when they stand up for prayer they stand up with a defeated soul (lazily) making ashow to the people and remember not Allah but little.

    They are wavering in the midst neither of this side nor of that. And whom Allah leads astray, you shall not thenfind a way for him.

    'O believers! Take not infidels for friends except Muslims. Do you wish that you may provide clear proof forAllah against you?

    Undoubtedly, the hypocrites are in the lowest section of the Hell, and you shall never get any helper for them.

    But those who repented, and mended (themselves) and, hold fast by the rope of Allah and made their religionpurely; for Allah, then these are with the Muslims. And soon Allah will give a great reward to Muslims.

    And what will Allah do by tormenting you? If you accept the just and accept faith. And Allah is Responsive,Aware.

    Allah likes not the uttering of evil words except one who is being oppressed. And Allah is Hearing, Knowing.

    If you do any good openly or in secret or pardon any one's evil, then undoubtedly, Allah is Pardoning, Powerful.

    Those who disbelieve in Allah and His Messengers and desire to separate from Allah His Messengers and say,'some we believe and other some we deny,' and desire to envisage a way between believing and disbelieving.

    They are the infidels in truth and We have already prepared a degrading torment for the infidels.

    And those who have believed in Allah and in all of His Messengers and have made no distinction between anyof them in believing to them, soon Allah will give their reward and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    'O beloved! (Prophet) The people of the Book ask you to bring down a book upon them from heaven but theyhave already asked Moses a greater thing than this, for said. "Show us Allah openly''. Then thunder overtookthem for their sins. Then they took the calf after clear signs had come to them. But We pardoned even thatand We gave Moses a clear dominance

    Then We raised the Tur (Mountain) over them for taking convenant with them and said to them, 'enter thegate prostrating'', and said to them. 'Transgress not in the matter of Sabbath' (Saturday of the Jews) and Wetook from them a firm convenant.

    Then! We cursed them because of their breaking the convenant and that they denied the signs of Allah, andslaying unjustly the prophets and for their saying there are covers on our hearts'. But Allah has sealed theirhearts because of their infidelity. So that they do not accept faith but little of them.

    And for this that they committed infidelity and raised a tremendous calumny over Marium.

    And for their saying. We slew the Messiah. Jesus son of Mary, the Messenger of Allah', Whereas they slew himnot and neither crucified him, but one was made like him for them. And those who are differing about him,certainly, they are in doubt regarding' him. They have not the least knowledge about it, but merely following aconjecture, and undoubtedly, they slew him' not.

    But Allah raised him up towards Himself, and Allah is Dominant, Wise.

    There is not any one of the people of the Book, who will not believe in him before his death, and he will be awitness against them on the Day of judgement.

    Then on account of great injustice of the Jews, We made unlawful for them some of those pure things thatwere lawful for them, and because of that, they kept away many from the way of Allah.

    And because they took usury whereas they were prohibited from it, and they consumed people's wealthunjustly, and those of them who became infidels, We have prepared a painful torment for them.

    Yes, but those of them who are firm in knowledge and believe, they believe in that which (O beloved prophet)has been sent down to you and that which was sent down before you, and the establishers of prayer and giverof poor due (Zakat) and the believers in Allah and the Last Day, to such, We shall soon give a great reward.

    Undoubtedly, O beloved Prophet! We have sent to you the revelation as We sent revelation to Nuh and theProphets after him, and We sent revelation to Abraham, and Ismail and Ishaque and Yaqoob and his childrenand Issa and Ayub and Yunus and Haroon and Suleman. And We gave to Daud the Book Zaboor (Psalms).

    And to Messengers whom We have already mentioned to you before and to those messengers whom We havenot mentioned to you. And Allah infects spoke to Moosa.

    The Messengers bearing good tidings and warning, so that mankind might not have any excuse against Allahafter the Messengers. And Allah is Dominant, Wise.

    But O beloved Prophet! Allah is witness to that what He has sent down to you, He has sent it down with Hisknowledge and the angels are witnesses, And Allah is Sufficient as a witness.

    Those who committed infidelity and kept others away from the way of Allah, undoubtedly they strayed faraway.

    Undoubtedly, who committed infidelity and transgressed. Allah will never forgive them, nor will show them anyway.

    But the way of the hell, that they will abide therein for ever. And this is easy for Allah.

    'O people! The Messenger has come to you with truth from your Lord, then believes in him for your own good.And if you commit infidelity, then undoubtedly, to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and in the earth.And Allah is knowing, Wise.

    'O people of the Book! Exceed not in your religion, and do not say of Allah any thing but truth. The MessiahIssa son of Marium is only the Messenger of Allah and His word that was sent to Mary and a spirit from Him.Then believe in Allah and His Messengers and do not say, 'three'. Refrain for your own good. Allah is the onlyone God. Far is it from His Holiness that He should have a son. To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens andwhatever is in the earth. And Allah is Sufficient, as real Doer.

    Messiah scorns not to be a bondman of Allah nor do the near one angel. And whoso scorns from His bondageand is proud, then soon He will gather them all towards Himself.

    Then those who accepted faith and did good deeds, after paying them their wages in full, He will give themmore out of His Grace, and those who were scornful and proud, He will give them a painful torment. And theywill not find for themselves beside Allah any supporter or helper.

    'O people! Undoubtedly, a manifest argument has come to you from Allah and We have sent down to you amanifest light.

    Then those who believed in Allah and hold His rope firmly, then soon Allah will cause them to enter His Mercyand Grace and will show them straight way towards Himself.

    'O beloved Prophet! They ask you for a decree. Say you, "Allah decrees to you in respect of a person wholeaves neither father nor child that if a man dies and has no child and he has a sister then his sister has half inhis heritage and the man will be the heir of his sister, if the sister has no child. Then if there are two sistersthen they have two-third in the heritage and if there are brother, sister, males and females both, then theshare of male is equal to the shares of two women. Allah explains for you clearly so that you may not goastray. And Allah knows every thing.





==========================================



5.




    'O believers! Fulfil your promises. Lawful (Cattle) are made unto you, the animals having no speaking power.Save those which shall be narrated to you further, but do not consider the hunting being lawful when you arein pilgrim garb. Undoubtedly, Allah commands what He wills.

    'O believers! Do not make lawful the symbols of Allah, and nor the sacred months, and nor the sacrifices sentto the Sacred House (Haram). And nor those bearing signs in their necks, and nor the property and honour ofthose who repair to the sacred House, seeking the grace and pleasure of their Lord. And when you put off thepilgrim's garb, then you may hunt. And let not the enmity of any people, as they had prevented you from theSacred Mosque insight you to commit excessiveness. And help each other in righteousness and piety, and helpnot one another in sin and transgression and remain fearing Allah. Undoubtedly, the torment of Allah is severe.

    You are forbidden (to eat) the dead and blood and the flesh of swine and that on which any name has beeninvoked other than Allah at the time of slaughtering and that which dies by strangling and that which is beatento death by anything unshaped and that killed by falling and that which is gored and that which has been eatenby any wild animal, but those which you have properly slaughtered and that which has been slaughtered at anyaltar and the division by casting lots with arrows. This is an act of sin. This day the infidels are despaired ofyour religion then fear them not, but fear Me. This day I have perfected your religion for you and completedMy favour upon you and have chosen Islam as religion for you. But whoso is forced by extreme hunger thirstwithout inclining towards sin, then undoubtedly, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    They ask you O beloved Prophet! What has been made lawful to them, say you, good and pure things havebeen made lawful to you and what hunting animals you have trained for hunting, teaching them of what Allahhas taught you, then eat of what they leave (catch) for you after hunting and pronounce the name of Allahover it, and remain fearing Allah, Undoubtedly, Allah is swift in taking account.

    This day all good and pure things are made lawful for you and the food of the people of the Book is lawful foryou, and your food is lawful for them and chaste Muslim women and chaste women from amongst those whowere given the Book before you, when you give them their dowries while bringing them in bondage (throughmarriage) nor for lust and nor making lover (secretly) And whoso becomes infidel after being a Muslim, hisentire work is destroyed and he is a loser in the Hereafter.

    'O believers! When you wish to stand for prayer, then wash your faces and your hands up to the elbows andpass your wet hands over your heads and wash your feet up to the ankles. And if you ever in need of a baththen purify yourselves well. And if you are ill or you are on a journey, or any of you comes from the privy oryou have an intercourse with women and in these conditions you do not get water, then be take yourselves toclean earth and wipe therewith your faces and your hands. Allah desires not that He should place you in anydifficulty, yes, He desires to purify you well and to complete His favour upon you so that you may be grateful

    And remember Allah's favour upon you and the convenant which He made with you, when you said, "we heardand obeyed," and fear Allah. Undoubtedly, Allah knows the thoughts in your hearts

    'O believers! Stand-up firmly by the Commandments of Allah, bearing witness with justice and let not theenmity of any people incite you that you should not do justice. Do justice that is nearer to piety and fear Allah,undoubtedly, Allah is aware of your doings.

    Allah has promised to the believers and those who do good deeds that for them are forgiveness and a greatreward.

    And those who committed infidelity and belied Our signs, they are the people of Hell.

    'O believers! Remember the favour of Allah upon you when a people intended to stretch out their handsagainst you, then He withheld their hands from you and fear Allah And on Allah only should the Muslims rely.

    And undoubtedly! Allah took convenant from children of Israel. And We raised among them twelve chieftains.And Allah said, 'undoubtedly, I am with you, necessarily if you establish prayer, and pay the poor-due (Zakat)and believe in My Messengers and pay them respect and lend to Allah a goodly loan, undoubtedly, I shallremove your sins and surely shall cause you to enter into the Gardens beneath which flow rivers then after thatwhoso of you commit infidelity, necessarily, he is strayed away from the right path.

    Then because of breaking their convenant, how We cursed them and made their hearts hard. They change thewords of Allah from their places and have forgotten a good portion of those admonitions, which were given tothem, and you shall always continue to be told of one or the other of their treachery, save a few of them, sopardon them, and overlook them. Undoubtedly, Allah loves the benefactors.

    And those who claimed that we are Christians, We took convenant from them, they too have forgotten a goodportion of those admonitions which were given to them, so We have caused enmity and hatred amongthemselves till the Day of Judgement. And soon Allah will tell them, what they used to do.

    'O people of the Book! Undoubtedly, Our Messenger has come to you who makes clear to you much of thatwhich you had hidden in the Book and pardons much. Undoubtedly, there has come to you from Allah a lightand a Book, luminous.

    Allah guides therewith him who followed His pleasure into the ways of peace and carries them to light from thedarkness by His Command and shows them right path.

    Undoubtedly, they have become infidels, who said, 'Messiah son of Marium, is the very Allah himself. Say you.'Who then can do anything against Allah if He desires to destroy Messiah son of Marium and his mother andeveryone on earth And to Allah belongs the Kingdom of heavens and earth and all that is between them. Hecreates what He pleases. And Allah can do every thing.

    And the Jews and Christians said We are sons of Allah and His dear ones'. Say you; 'why then does He tormentyou for your sins'? But you are human beings of His creations. He forgives whom He pleases. And to Allahbelongs the Kingdom of heavens and earth and all that is between them. And towards Him is the return.

    'O people of the Book! Undoubtedly, there has come to you Our this Messenger who makes clear to you OurCommands, after a break of the coming of messenger for a long time lest you say' 'there came not to us anybearer of glad tidings or Warner, then now there has come to you a bearer of glad tidings and Warner. AndAllah is Potent over everything.

    And when Moses said to his people, ''O my people! Remember the favour of Allah upon you that He madeamongst you Messengers and made you Kings, and gave you that which He gave not this day to anyone in theworld.'

    'O my people! Enter this Holy Land which Allah has written for you and turn not back, for you will turn in loss.

    They said, 'O Moses! Therein there are most powerful people, and we shall never enter it until they go forthfrom it, yes, if they go forth from there, then we shall go there.

    Two men of those who feared Allah whom Allah had favoured said, 'enter the gate forcibly against them, if youenter the gate then there is only yours, victory, and put your trust in Allah only, if you believe.

    They said, 'O Moses! We shall never go there until they are there, then go forth you and your Lord and youboth fight, we are sitting here'.

    Moses submitted, 'O my Lord! I have no control over any but myself and my bother then You keep us separatefrom these disobedients

    Allah said, 'then that land is forbidden to them for forty years, let them wander in the land, therefore grieve notover these disobedients.

    And narrate you to them the true news of the two sons of Adam, when they each offered an offering then itwas accepted from one and was not accepted from the other. Ho said, I swear that I shall kill you'. The othersaid, 'Allah accepts only from God fearing'.

    Undoubtedly, if you shall stretch your hand against me to kill me, then I shall not stretch my hand against youto kill you, I fear Allah, the Lord of all the Worlds.

    I wish that my sin as well as your sin both should go to your side, so that you may be the man of Hell and thisis the punishment of unjust.

    Then his soul induced him to kill his brother, so he killed him and remained in losers.

    Then Allah sent a raven, scratching in the earth, so that he might show him, how he should hide the corpse ofhis brother. He said, 'Oh woe is me! I could not be able even like this raven so that I may hide the corpse ofmy brother, then he remained repenting.

    On account of this. We wrote for the children of Israel that whosoever killed a soul not to retaliate for a soul,nor for creating disorder in the land, then it is as if he had killed all mankinds. And whoso gave life to one soul,then it is as if he had given life to all mankinds. And undoubtedly, Our Messengers came to them with clearproofs then undoubtedly, many of them after that commit excess in the land.

    The only recompense of those who fight against Allah and His Messenger and wander about in the land makingmischief is this that they all should he slain or he crucified or their hands of one side and the feet of the otherside be cut off or be sent far away from the land This is their disgrace in the world and in the Hereafter forthem there is great torment.

    But those who repented before you have control over them then know that Allah is Forgiving. Merciful.

    'O believers! Fear Allah and seek the means of approach to Him and strive in His way haply you may getprosperity.

    Undoubtedly, those who became infidels possessed all that is in the earth and as much over again to ransomthemselves thereby from the torment of the Day of Judge meet, it shall not be accepted from them and forthem is the painful torment.

    They will wish to come out of the Hell but they will not be able to come out of it, and for them is the lastingpunishment.

    And whoso the man or the woman is a thief, then cut off their hands, the recompense for what they havedone, a punishment from Allah And Allah is Dominant, Wise.

    Then whoso repents after his injustice and amends then Allah will turn to him with His Mercy, Undoubtedly,Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    Do you not know that to Allah belongs the Kingdom of heavens and earth? He punishes whom He pleases. AndAllah can do everything.

    'O Messenger! Let not those grieve you who run towards infidelity, some of those who say with their mouths,we have accepted faith. And their hearts are not Muslims, and some of the Jews who listen falsehood very welland listen very well to other people who have not come to you. They change the words of Allah from theirplaces, and say, If you get this command, then accept it, and if you get not this, then be on your guard.' Andto whom Allah pleases to misguide. Then you shall never be able to avail him anything against Allah. 'These arethey whose hearts Allah intended not to purify To them there is disgrace in the world, and to them there isgreat torment in the Hereafter.

    They are habitual listeners of lies, great devourers of the things forbidden. So if they come to you, then judgebetween them or turn your face from them, and if you will turn your face from them, they shall not harm youat all. And if you judge between them then judge with justice. Undoubtedly, Allah likes the just.

    And how they will wish judgement from you while they have Taurah with them wherein is Allah's judgementthen thereafter they turn away their faces from it. And they are not to believe.

    Undoubtedly, We have sent down Taurah, wherein is the guidance and light. According to it the Jews wereordered by Our obedient prophets and men of reaming and, jurists for it was desired from them to preservethe Book of Allah and they were witnesses to it, then fear not people, but fear Me and do not accept meanprice for Our Signs. And whoso judges not according to what Allah has sent down, they are the persons whoare infidels

    And We made obligatory on them in Taurah, a life for a life, and an eye for an eye, and a nose for a nose andan ear for an ear and a tooth for a tooth, and in injuries there is equitable retaliation. Then whosorecompenses with happy heart then that shall be expiation for his sin. And whoso judges not according to whatAllah has sent down, then they are the persons unjust.

    And We brought Isa son of Marium following those prophets on their footsteps, confirming Taurah that hadcome before him, and We gave him Injeel wherein is guidance and light and confirms Taurah that had comebefore it, and guidance and admonition to the duty-bound.

    And let the people of Injeel judge by what Allah has revealed in it, and whoso judges not by what Allah hassent down, then it is they who are the transgressors.

    And O beloved Prophet! We have sent down to you the true Book confirming the Books preceding it and as aprotector and witness over them. So judge you between them according to what Allah has sent down and Olistener! Do not follow their desires leaving the truth that has come to you, We ordained a law and way for allof you, and if Allah had willed, He would have made you all a single people, but He desires to test you in whatHe has given you. So desire to excel in good deeds. You are all to return towards Allah, and then He shall tellyou regarding what you used to dispute.

    And that O Muslim! Judge according to what Allah has sent down and follow not their desires and be on guardagainst them lest they cause to slip you from any command that has come to you Then if they turn their facesthen know that Allah wishes to give them punishment for some of their sins. And no doubt, many men aredisobedient.

    Do they seek the judgement of the days of ignorance? And who is better in judgement than Allah for a peopleof firm faith?

    'O believer! Do not take the Jews and Christians as friends, they are friends of each other among themselves,and whoso of you makes them his friends, then he is one of them. Undoubtedly Allah guides not the peopleunjust.

    Now, you will see those in whose hearts is a disease run towards the Jews and Christians saying, 'We fear lesta misfortune befall us'. Then it' is near that Allah may bring a, victory, or any Commandment from Himself,then they will remain regretting on what they had concealed in their hearts.

    And the believers say. 'Are they the same who swore by Allah in their Oaths with full strength that they werewith you'? Their works were all destroyed. Then they were left in loss.

    'O believers! Whoso of you will turn back from his religion, then soon Allah shall bring such people that theywill be dear to Allah and Allah will be dear to them, humble towards the Muslims, and stern towards theinfidels. They will fight in the way of Allah and will not fear the reproach of any reproacher This is the bounty ofAllah, He gives it whom He pleases. And Allah is All-embracing, All Knowing.

    Only Allah is your friend and His Messenger and the believers that they establish the prayer and pay the poor-due and are bowed down before Allah.

    And whoso takes Allah and His Messenger and Muslims as his fiends, then undoubtedly, the party of Allah onlyis dominant.

    'O believers! Do not take any of them as your friend who has made your religion a mockery and a play-thingthose who were given the Book before you and the infidels, and remain fearing Allah if you believe.

    And when you call for prayer, they make it a mockery and a play-thing. That is because they are wholly unwisepeople.

    Say you 'O people of the Book! What seemed you bad of us, only this that we believe in Allah and what hasbeen sent down to us and what was sent down before, and that most of you are dis-obedients.

    Say you, 'shall I tell you about those who are in a worse condition with Allah than this? Those whom Allah hascursed and on them has caused anger and of whom He has made apes and swine and worshippers of devil(Satan). Their destination is worse and they are astrayed farther from the right path.

    And when they come to you, they say, 'We are Muslims,' while they were infidel; when they came and infidelstoo when they departed. And Allah knows well what they are concealing.

    And you will see many of them run towards sin and transgression and eating what is forbidden. Undoubtedlythey are practising evil things

    Why their clergymen and priests do not forbid then from uttering sinful words and eating of things forbidden''Undoubtedly. They are performing evil things.

    The Jews have said, the hand of Allah is tied up, their own hands he tied up and there be curse of Allah onthem for their uttering, but His hands are wide open. He gives how He pleases, And O beloved Prophet! Whathas been sent down to you from your Lord will increase many of them in wickedness and infidelity. And Wehave cast among them enmity and hatred till the Day of Judgement. Whenever they kindle the fire of war,Allah extinguishes it and run about in the land for mischief. And Allah loves not the mischief mongers.

    And had the people of the Book believed and been duty-bound. Then indeed We would have removed theirsins and We would surely have caused them to enter gardens of Bliss.

    And had they maintained Taurah and Injeel and what has been sent down to them from their Lord, then theywould have received subsistence from above and from beneath their feet. A party among them is moderateand most of them are doing most evil things.

    'O Messenger! Communicate that which has been sent down to you from your Lord. And if it is not so, then youhave not conveyed His any message. And Allah will guard you from the people. Undoubtedly, Allah gives notway to the infidels.

    Say you, 'O people of the Book! You are nothing until you establish Taurah and Injeel and what has been sentdown to you from your Lord. And undoubtedly, O beloved Prophet! What has been sent down to you from yourLord, will increase many of them in wickedness and infidelity, then grieve not for the infidels.

    Undoubtedly, those who call themselves Muslims and in the same way the Jews and worshipers of stars(Sabaeans) and Christians, whoso of them believes with true heart in Allah and the Last Day and works good,then on them neither there is any fear nor any grief.

    Undoubtedly, We took a covenant from the children of Israel, and We sent Messengers to them. Whenever anyMessenger came with those things which their soul did not desire, they belied a party (of them) and anotherthey slain.

    And they imagine, that there shall be no punishment, (for them) then they became blind and deaf, then againAllah accepted their repentance, yet again most of them became blind and deaf. And Allah is seeing theirworks.

    Undoubtedly, those are infidels, who say, "Masih son of Maryam is the very Allah'. And whereas Masih had said'O children of lsrail worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord Undoubtedly, whoso. Associates anyone with Allah,then Allah has forbidden paradise to him and his abode is Hell. And there is no helper of unjust.

    Undoubtedly, those are infidels who say, 'Allah is third of the three Gods, and there is no God but the one God.And if they desist not from what they say, then a painful torment shall surely befall to those who will die asinfidels.

    Then why they do not turn towards Allah and ask His Forgiveness? And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    The Messiah son of Mary was not but a Messenger, many Messengers passed away before him. And his motheris a truthful woman. Both used to take food. See how clear signs We explain for them, then see how they areturned away.

    Say you, 'Do you worship beside Allah, that which is neither master of your loss nor of profit. And Allah is theHearing, the knowing.

    'O people of the Book! Exceed not the limits in your religion unjustly, and follow not the desires of a peoplewho have already gone astray and caused many to go astray and have strayed away from the right path.

    Cursed were those who committed infidelity from amongst the children of Israel by the tongue of Daud and Isason of Maryam. This reward because of their dis-obedience and transgression.

    Whatever bad they did they did not prohibit one other among themselves. Necessarily, they used to do evilthings

    You will see many of them befriend infidels. What an evil thing they have sent forth for themselves that Allah'sWrath fell upon them and they shall dwell in torment forever.

    And if they had believed in Allah and this prophet and what has been sent down to him, then they would nothave taken the infidels as friends but, many of them are disobedients.

    You shall surely find the Jews and polytheist the bitterest enemies of Muslims, and surely you shall find thenearest in friendship to Muslims, those who used to say, "we are Christians." That is because among them aremen of learning and monks and they are not proud.

    And when they hear what has been sent down towards the Messenger, then see, their eyes are overflowingtears because they have recognised the truth they say, 'O our Lord we have accepted faith, then write us downamong the witnesses of truth.

    And what happened to us that we should not have faith in Allah and the truth that has come to us and we longthat our Lord would cause us to enter with the righteous people.

    Therefore, Allah on account of what they say gave them gardens beneath which rivers flow, they will abidetherein. This is the recompense of the righteous.

    And those who committed infidelity and belied Our signs are the people of Hell.

    'O believers! Make not unlawful the pure things, which Allah has made lawful for you and cross not the limit.Undoubtedly, Allah likes not those who cross the limit.

    And eat what Allah has provided you lawful and pure. And fear Allah in Whom you believe.

    Allah holds not you responsible for oaths taken by misunderstanding, but He holds you responsible for oathswhich you made binding then the expiation of such oaths is the feeding of ten needy people with average foodwith which you feed your family members, or clothing them or the freeing of a slave then whoso finds notanything of these, then for him is the fasting of three days. This is the expiation of your oaths when you havesworn. And guard your oaths. Similarly Allah explains His signs to you so that you may be grateful.

    'O believers! Wine and gambling and idols and divining arrows are only unclean things, a work of devil (Satan)then save yourselves from them, so that you may prosper.

    The devil (Satan) desires only to put hatred and enmity among you in regard to wine and gambling and to baryou from the remembrance of Allah and from prayer, will you then desist?

    And obey Allah and obey the Messenger and be careful then if you turn back, know then that the responsibilityover Our Messenger is only to deliver the message clearly.

    On those who believed and did righteous work there is no sin for what they have eaten when they fear andkeep faith and do righteous work, again fear and keep faith, then again fear and remain righteous And Allahloves the, righteous.

    'O believers! Allah shall surely test you with some such game which your hands and lances may reach in orderthat Allah may make known those who fear Him without seeing, then after this who so crosses the limit, forhim is a painful punishment.

    'O believers! Kill not game while you are in a pilgrim garb. And who so amongst you kills it intentionally, then;his compensation is that he should give a like animal from amongst the cattle as judged by two just personsamong you, this offering reaching to the Kaaba, or as an expiation, feeding of some needy persons or itsequivalent in, fasting, so that he may taste the enormity of his deed. Allah has pardoned what happened in thepast. And who so will do now Allah will take retribution from him. And Allah is Dominant Lord of Retribution.

    Lawful is to you the game of the sea and its eating for the benefit of you and the travellers and forbidden toyou is the game of the land, so long you are in pilgrim garb. And fear Allah towards Whom you are to rise.

    Allah made Kaaba the sacred House as an establishment for the people, and so the sacred month and theofferings of the sacred House and the animals with the marks hanging in the neck. That is so that you maybelieve that Allah knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth and that Allah knows everything.

    Know that the torment of Allah is severe and Allah is Forgiving. Merciful.

    Nothing is on the Messenger but communicating the Message. And Allah knows what you disclose and whatyou hide.

    Say you, 'the dirty and clean are not equal, even though the abundance of the dirty may please you, thenremain fearing Allah,O men of understanding! So that you may get prosperity.

    'O believers! ask not such things which if disclosed to you, may displease you; and if you will ask while theQuran is descending then they would be disclosed to you. Allah has already pardoned them. And Allah isForgiving, Forbearing.

    A people before you asked them, then became rejecters therein.

    Allah has not appointed any 'Bahira' and nor 'Saiba' and nor 'Wasila' and nor 'Hami' (names of sacred animalsshe camels and she goats of the time of Pagans) but yes, the infidels fabricate the lie against Allah. And mostof them are perfectly unwise.

    And when it is said to them, 'come to what Allah has sent down and to the Messenger', they say,' enough forus is that wherein we found, our fathers, what! Even though their fathers knew nothing nor were guided.

    'O believers! Take care of yourselves. He, who has gone astray, will not harm you when you are on the rightway. Towards Allah is the return of you all, then He will tell you what you were doing.

    'O believers! The evidence among yourselves when death approaches any of you at the time of making a will isof two jut persons from among you or two of the others, when you be on journey in the land, and the calamityof death befall you, Detain them both after prayer, they should swear by Allah if you are in any doubt, that weshall not purchase any wealth in exchange of the oath, even though he may be a near relation, and will nothide the testimony of Allah if we do so, we are surely among the sinners.

    Then if it is known that they became guilty of any sin, then two others should stand in their place fromamongst those nearer to the deceased whose right has been injured by this sin (by this false evidence), thenthey should swear by Allah that our evidence is more upright than the evidence of those two, and we crossednot the limit, if it be so then we should be of the unjust.

    It is nearer that they may give the evidence as it should be or fear that some oaths may be rebutted after theiroaths. And fear Allah and listen to His commands. And Allah gives not the way to the dis-obedients.

    The day when Allah will gather the Messengers, then will say, 'what answer was made to you,' they will submit,'We have no knowledge, it is You only the Knower of all things unseen.

    When Allah will say, 'O Issa son of Maryam, remember My favour upon you and your mother, when I aided youwith holy spirit, then you spoke to people in the cradle and in the grown up age, and when I taught you theBook and wisdom and Taurah and Injeel, and when you make of clay a figure like a bird by My command thenyou breathe into it, then it begins to fly by My command, and you cure the born blind and the leper by Mycommand, and you bring forth alive the dead by My command, and when I restrained the children of Israelfrom you when you came to them taking clear signs, then the infidels of them spoke, 'this is nothing but anopen made.

    And when I inspired the disciples to believe in Me and in My Messenger, they said, 'We have believed, and bareyou witness that we are muslims.'

    When the disciples said, 'O Issa son of Maryam, will your Lord do, that He should sent us down a tray of foodfrom the heaven? He said, 'fear Allah if you have faith.

    They said, 'we wish that we may eat of it and our hearts may be satisfied and we may see with our own eyesthat you spoke truth to as, and we may be witnesses thereof.'

    Issa son of Maryam submitted, 'O Allah our Lord, 'sends down to us a tray of food from the heaven so that itmay be an occasion of rejoicing for us, for the first and the last of us and a sign from You, and provide for usand you are the best of Providers.

    Allah said, 'I send it down to you, now therefore whoso of you will commit infidelity, then undoubtedly. I shalltorment him with a torment wherewith I shall not punish to anyone in the entire Universe.

    And when Allah will say, 'O Issa son of Maryam! Did you tell to people, 'make me and my mother two godsbesides Allah'? He will submit 'bellowed be You, it is not justified for me that I should tell the thing to which Ihave no reach. 'If I had said that You would surely have known it You know what is in my heart and I do notknow what is in Your knowledge. Undoubtedly, it is You only, Knower of, all hidden things.

    I said not to them but that which You had commanded me that worship Allah my Lord and your Lord, and Iknew of them as long as I remained in them, then when You took me up, then You were the Watcher overthem, and every thing is, present before You.

    If You punish them, they are Your bondmen, and if You forgive them, then undoubtedly, You are only theDominant, the Wise.

    Allah said, 'this is the day in which their truthfulness will benefit the truthful, for them, are Gardens beneathwhich rivers flow, they shall abide therein for ever. Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Allah.This is the great success.

    For Allah is the kingdom of the heavens and earth and whatever is in them. And. He is Potent over everything.





=============================================

6.anaam





    All Praise to Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth and brought into being the darkness and the light,yet the infidels ascribe equals to their Lord.

    It is He Who created you from clay, then He decreed a term, and there is a determined promise with Him,thereafter you doubt.

    And He is the very Allah of heavens and earth He knows all your secrets and what you reveal and knows yourdoings.

    And there comes to them no sign of the signs of their, Lord, but they turn away, their faces from it.

    Then undoubtedly, they belied the truth when it came to then. So now, they are to be informed of that theywere mocking at.

    Have they not observed how many a generation We have destroyed before them? We gave them suchestablishment in the earth, which We gave you not, and We sent them rain in torrents and caused rivers flowbeneath them, then We destroyed them on account of their sins, and after them raised up another generation.

    And if We had sent down on you something written on paper so that they would have touched it with theirhands, even then the infidels would have said, 'this is nothing but manifest magic'.

    And they said, 'Why not any angel has been sent on him? And if We would have sent an angel the affair wouldhave been finished, and they would not have been given time.

    And if We had made the prophet an angel, even then We would have made him a man, and they would havethe same doubt in him as they have now.

    And assuredly, O beloved prophet! Messengers before you were mocked at; then those who were mocking atthem their mockery surrounded them selves.

    Say you, Go about in the land, then see how has been the end of beliers'.

    Say you, 'To whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth? Say you 'To Allah, 'He has written mercyupon His generosity. Undoubtedly, He will surely gather you on the Day of judgement There is no doubt in it.Those who have put their souls in loss would not believe.

    And to Him belongs whatever dwells in the night and day. And He is the Hearer the Knower.

    Say you, 'Shall I take for protector any other than Allah Who has created heavens and earth, and He feeds andis not fed? Say you; I have been commanded to submit first and never to be of polytheists.

    Say you; 'If I disobey my Lord then, I fear the torment of a Mighty Day'.

    On that day, from whomsoever the torment is averted Allah indeed has had mercy on him And this is themanifest triumph.

    And if Allah causes any evil to you, then there is none to remove it but He. And if He brings you good, then Hecan do everything.

    And He is all Dominant over His bondmen. And He is the very Wise, the Aware.

    Say you, 'Whose evidence is the greatest'? Say you, 'Allah is witness between you and me this Quran has beenrevealed to me so that with it may warn you and whomsoever it reaches.' Then do you give this evidence thatbesides Allah there are other gods? Say you 'I do not give this evidence. 'Say you, 'He is the only one to beworshiped and I am quit of all those, you associate with Him'.

    Those whom We gave the Book recognise this prophet as they recognise their sons. Those who have put theirsouls in loss would not believe.

    And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah or belies His signs Undoubtedly, the unjust willnever get prosperity.

    And the day when, We shall raise them all together then will say to the polytheists, 'where are those yourassociates whom you used to assert'.

    Then there remained not any fabrication for them but to say, 'by Allah, Our Lord, We were not polytheists.

    See! How they lied against themselves and were lost from them the things, which they had been concocting.

    And among them are some who give ear (listen) to you and, We have put veils over their hearts so that theyunderstand it not and in their ears is heaviness. And if they may see all signs even then they will not believe inthem. In as much as when they come to you disputing, then infidels say, 'this is not but the stories of theancients.'

    And they forbid from it and keep a far from it and they ruin not but their own souls and they perceive not.

    And if you could see when they will be made to stand before the fire then they will say, 'would that We mightbe resumed and belie not, the sighs of their Lord and might become Muslims.

    But it has become manifest to them what they used to conceal before. And if they were sent back, they woulddo the same from which they were forbidden and undoubtedly, they are surely liars.

    And they say, This is the only our life of the world and we are not to be raised'.

    And if you could see when they shall be made to stand before their Lord. He will say, is not this truth? They willsay, 'why not by our, Lord' He will say, 'then now taste the torment, the reward of your infidelity.'

    Undoubtedly, they remained losers who denied the meeting with their Lord, so much so, that when the Hourcame to them suddenly, they said, 'Oh alas for us, that we committed mistake in accepting it and that we bearour burden on our backs O what an evil burden they are bearing?

    And worldly life is nothing but a play and amusement. And undoubtedly, the last abode is better for those whofear. Do you not then?

    We know that what they say, grieves you, they belie you not, but the evil doers deny the signs of Allah.

    And the Messengers were belied before you, but they endured patiently when they were belied and werepersecuted, until Our help came to them. And there is none to change the words of Allah; and the news of theMessengers has already come to you.

    And if their turning away of faces has grieved you, then if you can do, seek any tunnel in the ground or aladder unto heaven, and bring a sign for them. And if Allah has willed, then He would have gathered them onthe guidance, so O listener! Be never you an innocent.

    Those very accept who listen, and Allah will raise those of dead hearts, then towards Him they will be driven.

    And they say, 'why has not a sign been sent down to them from their Lord? Say you, 'Allah has power to senddown a sign, but most of them are fully ignorant.

    And there is no one crawling on earth nor any bird that flies on its wings but are the communities like you. Wehave left out nothing in the Book. Then to their Lord they shall be raised.

    And those who belied Our signs are deaf and dumb in utter darkness. Allah sends astray whom He will, andplaces on the straight path whom He will.

    Say you, 'tell you then if the torment of Allah comes to you or the Hour is established, will you call upon anyother than Allah, if you are truthful?

    But you will call Him alone, so if He please He would remove that for which you call for Him, and you wouldforget the associates.

    And undoubtedly, We sent; Messengers towards communities before you then seized them with adversity anddistress so that they might beseech.

    Why did it not happen that when Our torment came upon them, they would have beseeched? But their heartswere hardened and the devil (Satan) made fair seeming to them their deeds in their eyes.

    Then when they forget that with which they were admonished We opened unto them the gates of all thingsuntil when they became delighted at what they were given, then We seized them suddenly, now they were leftin disappear.

    Then the unjust were uprooted completely; and a praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds.

    Say you, 'look you, if Allah should take away your ears and eyes and seal up your hearts, then who is the Godother than Allah Who could bring these things back to you? See how in different manners We explain the signsbut they turn away their faces.

    Say you, look you, if the torment of Allah comes upon you suddenly or openly then who will be destroyed savethe unjust people.

    We do not send the Messengers but to give glad tidings and to warn, then those who believed and amendedthemselves then to them there is neither fear nor any grief.

    And those who belied Our signs, torment shall reach to them because of their disobedience.

    Say you, 'I do not say to you, I possess the treasures, of Allah, 'and nor I Say,' I know the unseen myself, andnor do I say to you, 'I am an angel. I follow only that which is revealed to me.' Say you, shall the blind and theseeing become equal? Do you then not ponder?

    And with this Quran warn those who fear that they shall be raised towards their Lord in a manner that thereshall be neither supporter nor any intercessor for them beside Allah, in the hope that they may be come God-fearing.

    And drive not away those who call upon their Lord morning and evening seeking His pleasure. Nothing on youfrom their account, and nothing on them from your account, then if you drive them away, this thing is far fromjustice.

    And thus We made one of them a trial for the other on that the wealthy infidel may say seeing the needyMuslims, 'Are these people whom Allah has favoured among us? Does not Allah know well the grateful?

    And when those who believe in Our signs come to you then say to them, 'Peace be upon you,' your Lord hasprescribed mercy on Himself, that whoso of you does some evil ignorantly and repents thereafter and amends,then undoubtedly, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    And in this way We explain fully Our signs, and in order that the way of the guilty may become evident.

    Say you, 'I have been for bidden to worship those whom you worship besides Allah. 'Say you, 'I follow not yourvain desires, if it be so then I would go astray and would not remain, on the path'.

    Say you, 'I am on a shinning proof from my Lord and you belie it; I have not that with me for which you arehastening.' There is no order but of Allah. He explains the truth and He is the Best of judges.

    Say you 'If I had that thing for which you are hastening, then the affair would have been already endedbetween me and you. And Allah knows well the oppressors.

    And with Him is the key of unseen, He only knows them And He knows whatever is in the land and in the sea.And the leaf that falls He knows it. And there is not any grain in the darkness of the earth, and nor anythingwet and nor dry which is not written in a luminous Book.

    And He is the very Who takes hold of your souls by night and knows whatever you earn by day, then He raisesyou in the day so that the appointed term may be completed, then you have to return towards Him, then Hewill tell you what you used to do.

    And He is the Dominant over His bondmen and He,' sends guardians over you, until when death comes to anyof you, Our angels take his soul and they do not fail.

    Then they are turned back towards their true Lord Allah. (Do you hear?) His is the order and He is the Quickestin taking account.

    Say you, 'Who is that Who delivers you from the calamities of the forest and sea Whom you call upon inhumility and secretly that if He saves us from this, then we shall certainly be grateful.

    Say you, Allah delivers you from this and from every distress, yet you associate partners with Him.

    Say you, 'He is powerful to send torment on you from above you or from beneath your feet or He may makeyou to encounter by making different groups and to make you, taste the severity of one another,' see, How Weexplain the signs in various ways haply they may understand.

    And your people belied it, and it is the truth. Say you; 'I am not an advocate over you'.

    For every thing, there is a time fixed and soon you will come to know.

    And O listener! When you see those who plunge in Our signs then turn away your face from them until theyplunge in some other discourse, and whatever they say the devil (Satan) may make you forget then sit not youafter recollection with the unjust people.

    And there is nothing on the righteous from their account yes, but to admonish them, haply they may abstain.

    And leave those alone who have made their religion a mockery and play thing and the worldly life has deceivedthem and admonishes them with Quran, so that a soul may not be caught on account of its doings. It shallhave neither helper nor intercessor beside Allah. And if it gives every compensation for itself, it shall not beaccepted from it. These are they who have been caught on their doings. For them is a drink of boiling waterand painful torment, the recompense of their infidelity.

    Say you, 'shall we worship beside Allah that which neither does us any good nor does any harm, and shall webe turned back on our heels, after that Allah has shown us the way, like one whom the devil has made toforget his way in the earth, he is bewildered, (while) his companions are calling him towards the way that cometo us? Say you, 'The guidance of Allah is the only guidance, and we are commanded to submit to Him only whois the Lord of all worlds.

    And this that establishes prayer and fears Him and it is He towards Whom you are to rise.

    And it is He who has made the heavens and earth rightly. And the Day when the destruction will occur, He willsay to everything, 'be then it will become atonce. His word is the truth. And His is the kingdom on the daywhen the trumpet will be blown He is the Knower of every secret and open and He is the Wise, the Aware.

    And remember when Abraham said to his father, Azar, 'Do you take the idols for gods'? Undoubtedly, I find youand your people in manifest error.

    And thus We show to Abraham all the Kingdoms of heavens and earth and in Order that he might become ofthe convinced at sight.

    When the darkness of night came on him, he saw a star, said he, 'you take this as my Lord! Then when it set,said he, 'I do not like the setting ones'.

    Then when he saw the moon shining, said he, 'you tell this my Lord, then when it set, said he, 'if my Lordwould not have guided me I would also have been of tee same who have gone astray.'

    Then when he saw the sun shining, said he, au say this my Lord! This is biggest of all then when it set, said he'O people, I am quit of all those things which you associate with God.

    I diverted my face towards Him who have made the heavens and earth, being of Him only and I am not of thepolytheists.

    And his people began to dispute with him, said he, 'do you dispute with me in respect of Allah, then He hasalready told me the way, and I do not fear those that you tell as His associates, but yes if my Lord, wishesanything. My Lord comprehends every thing in His knowledge. Then, do you not accept the admonition?

    And how should I fear those you associate and while you do not fear that you associated with Allah that forwhich He has not sent down to you any certificate. Then which of the two groups is more entitled for security,if you know?

    Those who have believed and mixed not any injustice with their faith, these are the people for whom there issecurity and they are the very who are guided.

    And this is Our argument that We gave to Ibraham against his people; We raise in degrees Whom we please.Undoubtedly, your Lord is Wise, Knowing.

    And We gave him Ishaque and Yaqub We showed the path to all of them and showed the path to Nuh beforethem, and of his progeny, to Daud and Suleman and Ayub and Yusuf and Musa and Haroon, and thus Werecompense the righteous.

    And to Zakaria (Zacharia) and Yahya (John) and Isa (Jesus) and Ilyas (Elias). These are all entitled to be Ournear ones (righteous)

    And to Ismail and Yasa (Elisha) and Yunus (Jonah) and Lot, And to each one We preferred above all in histime.

    And also to some of their fathers and their progeny and some of their brothers, and We chose them andshowed them the straight path.

    This is the guidance of Allah. He gives whom He will of His bondmen, and if they would have committedpolytheism, then surely, all that they had already done would have been destroyed.

    Those are they to whom We gave the Book and order and prophet-hood, then if these people reject it. ThenWe have appointed for it such a people who are not the rejecters.

    These are they whom Allah has guided, then follow you their path. Say you; I ask you no wage for Quran thatis not but an admonition to the entire world.

    And the Jews did not know the estimation of Allah as was necessary for Him when they said, 'Allah has notsent down anything on any man.' Say you, 'who has sent down that Book which was brought by Moses, a lightand a guidance for the people of which you have made separate papers to show and much of it you conceal;and you are taught that which you knew not neither you nor your fathers 'Say, 'Allah.'' Then leave them playingin their absurdity.

    And this is a blessed Book ' that We have sent down confirming those Books which were before it and in orderthat you may warn the chief of all cities (Mekkah) and to all those around it in the entire world. And those whobelieve in the Hereafter believe in this Book and guard their prayer.

    And who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie ' against Allah or Says, 'I have received a revelation andnothing has been revealed to him and who says, 'just now I send down the like of what Allah has sent down,and if you could see the unjust when they are in the agonies of death and the angels have stretched theirhands; (saying) 'yield up your souls', this day you will be awarded the punishment of disgrace for you used toforge lie against Allah and because you were big with pride against His signs.

    And undoubtedly, you have come to US alone as We created you for the first time, and you have left behindyour backs whatever wealth and had given you; and We see not with you your intercessors of whom youasserted as your partners in your affairs, undoubtedly, the ties between you are cut off and gone is that fromyou who used to assert.

    Undoubtedly! Allah is the Cleaver of seed-grain and date stone. He brings forth the living from the dead and isthe Bringer forth of the dead from the living. This is Allah! Where are you going back?

    He brings forth the dawn after cleaving the darkness and He has made the night for rest and the sun andmoon as reckoning. This is the measurement of the Mighty, the Knowing.

    And it is He who has made the stars for you that you may get the way in the darkness of the Land and the sea.We have explained the signs in detail for people who know.

    And it is He who has produced you from a single soul, then you have to stay some where and to remain asrepository at some other place. Undoubtedly! We have explained the signs in detail for a people ofunderstanding.

    And it is He who has sent down water from the heaven, then We brought forth every things of growth and outof it We brought forth the green (foliage) from which We bring forth-clustered grains and out of the sheaths ofpalms the bunches close to one another and gardens of grapes and olives and pomegranates, similar in somerespect and dissimilar in some other respects. Look at its fruit when it bears fruit and its ripening. Undoubtedlythere are signs in it for the persons believing.

    And they have made jinns as associates of Allah whereas He created them and they devised for him sons andDaughters without any knowledge. Holy is He and exalted far above from their affairs.

    The Originator of the heavens and earth, from where He have a son whereas there is no woman for Him andhe has created everything and He knows all things.

    This is Allah, your Lord none is to be worshipped except He, the Maker of every thing, then worships Him, He isGuardian over everything.

    Eyes comprehend Him not and all eyes are under His comprehension and it is He Who is the Innermost, AllAware.

    There have come to you the eye Opener arguments from your Lord, then whosoever saw it, then it is for hisown good and whosoever became blind, then it is for his own bad and I am not a guardian over you.

    And thus We variously explain the signs and because the infidels may say, 'you have studied' and that We maymake it clear over the people who know.

    Follow you what has been revealed to you, none is to be worshipped except He and turn your face from thepolytheists.

    And had Allah willed they would not have committed polytheism and We made not you watcher over them, norare you an advocate over them.

    And abuse not those whom they worship beside Allah because they will commit rudeness in respect of Allahthrough their excessiveness and ignorance. Thus We have mace fair the deeds of every nation in their eyes,then they have to return back towards their Lord and He will tell them what they used to do.

    And they swear by Allah in their oath with utmost earnest that if there come to them any sign then they wouldsurely believe therein. Say you, 'The signs are with Allah and what you know that when they would come thenthey will not believe therein.

    And We turn about their hearts and their eyes, as they believed not therein at the first time and We leave themto wander about in their contumacy.

    And if We had sent down angels towards them and the dead had spoken to them and We had broughttogether all things before them, even then they would not believe but if Allah would have willed, but most ofthem are totally ignorant.

    And in like manner We have made for every prophet an enemy, devils from among men and jinn, that in themone inspires the other secretly with fabricated discourse in order to deceive and had your Lord wished, theywould not have done so then leave them on their fabrications.

    And because that the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter may incline towards it, and that theymay like it, and may earn sin what they are to earn.

    Then, shall I seek the judgement of some one other than Allah, when it is He who has sent down towards youthis detailed Book? And those whom We have given the Book know that it is sent down by your Lord in truth;so O' Listener' be never then of the doubters.

    And Complete is the word of your Lord in veracity and justice. There is no one to change His words: and He isthe Hearer, the Knower.

    And O listener! There are majority of those on earth that if you follow their saying, then they would misleadyou from the way of Allah. They are only behind their imaginations and they are in mere conjecture.

    Your Lord knows well who has gone astray from His way, and He knows well the guided ones.

    Then eat of that on which the name of Allah has been pronounced, if you believe in His signs.

    And what happened to you that you should not eat out of that on which the name of Allah has beenpronounced. He has explained to you in detail what is forbidden to you, but when you be compelled to it? Andundoubtedly, many mislead by their own desires without knowing. Undoubtedly, your Lord knows well thetransgressors.

    And leave the apparent and secret sins. Those who earn sin, soon they will get punishment of their earning.

    And eat not that over which the name of Allah has not been pronounced for undoubtedly that is dis-obedienceAnd Surely the devils inspire their friends that they may quarrel with you, and if you obey them, then at thattime you are polytheist.

    And will he who was dead, then We gave him life, and made for him a light by which he walks among mankind,become like that who is in darkness from which he is not to come out? Thus, in the eyes of infidels their deedshave been made fair looking.

    And thus have We made in each town the leaders of the guilty, so that they may plot therein. And they plot notbut against their own souls, and they perceive not.

    And when any sign comes to them, then they say, 'We shall never believe unless we receive the like of whathas been given to the Messengers of Allah. Allah knows well where to place His Messenger-ship. Soon theguilty ones will receive humiliation before Allah and severe torment for their plotting.

    And whomsoever Allah wishes to show the way, He opens his breast for Islam, and whomsoever wishes to losehis way, He makes his breast narrow, straitened well as if he is climbing up into the sky forced by some oneelse And thus Allah inflicts Punishment on those who believe not.

    And this is the straight path of your Lord. We have explained the signs in detail for the people acceptingadmonition.

    For them is the home of safety with their Lord, and He is their Protector, this is the fruit of their doings.

    And the day He will raise all of them and will say, 'O company of Jinn! You have gathered many men," andtheir allies among men will say. 'O our Lord! We made use of one another and we have reached the term youhad determined for us.' He will say, 'Fire is your abode, abide therein for ever but as Allah will.' O belovedprophet Undoubtedly your Lord is Wise, Knowing.

    And thus We set over one against the other among the unjust for what they have done.

    'O company of Jinn and men! Did not Messengers come to you from amongst yourselves reciting My signs toyou, and warning you of seeing this day of yours? They will say, We bear witness against our souls,' and theworldly life deceived them and will themselves bear witness against their souls that they were infidels.

    This is so because your Lord destroys not the town unjustly while their people are unaware.

    And for every one there are degrees in accordance with their deeds. And your Lord is not unaware of theiractions.

    And O beloved prophet' Your Lord is Self sufficient, Merciful O mankind! If He please, He may take you away,and bring some other whom He will in your place, just as He created you from the off springs of other people.

    Undoubtedly, what is promised to you is sure to come and you cannot get it tired.

    Say you. 'O my people! Go on acting in your places do my work, 'then now you wish to know for whomremains the ultimate Abode. Undoubtedly, the unjust get not the welfare.

    And whatever filth and cattle Allah has produced they made Him a sharer in them, then said, 'this is for Allahaccording to their fancies and this is for our associates.' Then that which is of their associates does not reachGod and that which is for God reaches their associates. What an evil judgement they assign?

    And thus their associates have made fair-seeming the killing of offsprings in the eyes of many polytheists, sothat they may ruin them and may confuse them in their religion. And had Allah willed, they would not havedone so, then you leave them, they are with their fabrications.

    And they say, 'this cattle and tilth are taboo, only those can eat them whom We please with their false notions,and there are some cattle over which riding is forbidden, and some cattle over which they do not pronouncethe name of Allah at the time of slaughtering, this all is to assert lie against Allah. Soon He shall recompensethem for their fabrications.

    And they say, 'what is: within the bellies of those cattle solely belong to our males and is forbidden to ourwomen, and if it be born dead, then they all are partners therein. Soon Allah will recompense them for theirsuch actions. Undoubtedly He is Wise, knowing.

    Undoubtedly, those who kill their offsprings by their foolish ignorance are ruined and make unlawful what Allahhas provided for them, forging a lie against Allah. Undoubtedly, they have strayed and have not got the way.

    And it is He who has produced gardens, trellised and untrellised, and date palms and filth in which are variouskinds of food and olives and pomegranates similar in some respects and dis-similar in some other respects. Eatof their fruits when bear fruits and pay due thereof on the day of harvesting, and spend not wastefully.Undoubtedly, He does not like those who spend wastefully

    And of the cattle some are for carrying burden and some lying on earth (too small) Eat of what Allah hasprovided for you and do not follow the footsteps of the devil (Satan). Undoubtedly, he is your open enemy.

    Eight males and females, one pair of sheep and one pair of goat; say you, 'has He made both males unlawfulor both females or that which the wombs of two females contain? Inform by any knowledge, if you aretruthful.'

    And a pair of camel and a pair of cow; say you, 'has He made both males unlawful or both females or thatwhich the wombs of both females contain?" Were you present when Allah gave you this order, then who ismore unjust than one who forges lie against Allah, that he may misguide the people with his ignorance.Undoubtedly, Allah does not show the path to unjust.

    Say you, 'I find not in what has been revealed to me any meal forbidden to any eater, but that it be a deadbody, or flowing blood of veins or the flesh of a vile animal (swine) for that is foul or an animal of disobediencein slaughtering of which the name other than God has been pronounced, then whoso is driven by necessityneither willing himself nor exceeding beyond the necessity, then undoubtedly. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    And to the Jews We forbade every animal having hoofs and the fat of cow and goat We forbade them but whattheir backs or intestines carry or what is attached to their bones. We recompensed them for their contumacy,and undoubtedly, We are surely the Truthful.

    Again if they belie you say you, 'your Lord is of extensive mercy and His torment is not turned aside from theguilty people.'

    Now the polytheists say, 'if Allah had willed, we would not have committed polytheism, neither our fore-fathers,nor had We forbidden anything.' In the same manner belied those who were before them until they tasted Ourtorment. Say you, 'Have you any knowledge that you bring it forth to us? You are only behind your conjectureand without nothing you estimate.

    Say you, 'then the argument of Allah is conclusive; so if He had wished, then. He would have guided you all.'

    Say you, 'Bring your those witnesses who testify that Allah has forbidden this, 'then if they testify, then you Olistener! Bear not witness with them, and follow not the desires of those who belie Our signs, and who believenot in the Hereafter, and they ascribe equals to their Lord.

    Say you, 'Come I will rehearse to you what your Lord has forbidden to you, 'that you associate not anyone withHim, and that you do good to parents, and that you kill not your children because of poverty. We shall providefor you and for them, and that you approach not shameful deeds whichever them is open and whichever ishidden; and slay not unjustly the life which Allah has made sacred. This has He ordered you that you mayunderstand.

    And do not approach the property of the orphans but in the best way, until he reaches the maturity and fill upthe measure and weight with justice. We burden no soul but to its capacity, and when you speak, then sayjust, event though it be a matter of your relative, and fulfil the covenant of Allah. This He has en-joined youstrictly that haply you may accept admonition.

    And that, this is My' straight path, then follow it and follow not other paths for they will deviate you from Hispath. This He has ordered you that haply you may be self-restrained.

    Again We gave the Book to Moses for doing full favour upon him who is righteous, and the details ofeverything, and a guidance and mercy that haply they may believe in the meeting of their Lord.

    And this blessed Book We have sent down, follow it then and be self-restrained, so that you may receivemercy.

    Lest you should say, The book was sent down to the two peoples before us, and we were unaware of theirreading and teaching.

    Or lest you should say, If the Book had been sent own to us, then we would have be better guided than they.'So there has come to you a luminous argument from your Lord, and guidance, and a mercy. Who is then moreunjust than he who belies the signs of Allah and turns his face from them? Soon We shall punish those withgreat torment who turns away their faces from Our signs, the recompense of turning away their faces.

    What they are waiting for, but for this that the angels should come to them, or that the torment of your Lordshould come, or that a sign off your Lord will come? The day when that one sign of your Lord will come.Believing will not profit any soul that did not believe before or had not earned any good in its belief. Then sayyou. 'Wait, we also wait.'

    Those who have created separate paths in their religion and have become many serfs O beloved prophet! Youhave no concern at all with them. He will inform to them what they used to do.

    Whoso brings one good, then for him there are ten like thereof, and whose brings an evil, shall not berecompensed but to its equal and they shall not he wronged.

    Say you, 'Undoubtedly, my Lord has shown me the straight path, a right religion, the creed of Ibrahim who wasaloof from every falsehood and was not a polytheist.'

    Say you, 'Undoubtedly, my prayer, and my sacrifices, and my living and my dying are all for Allah Who is theLord of all the worlds.'

    No one is associated to Him, so I have been commanded and I am the first muslim.

    Say you, 'shall I seek a Lord other than Allah, while He is the Lord of everything. And whatever one earns it ison his, own account. And no bearer of burden will bear the burden of another. Then you have to returntowards your Lord, He will inform you of that in, which you used to differ.

    And He it is Who has made you vicegerent in the earth and has raised one over the other in degrees amongyou that He may try you in what He has given you. Undoubtedly, your Lord is not late in tormenting, andundoubtedly, He is necessarily Forgiving, Merciful.





===========================
7.aaraf



    'O beloved prophet! (Alif Lam, Mim, Saad.)

    A Book has been sent to you, so let there be no impediment in your heart because of it, so that you may warntherewith and an admonition to the muslims.

    'O people! Follow what has been sent down to you from your Lord, and do not go behind other masters leavingHim. Very little you understand.

    And many a town We have destroyed then Our torment came upon them by night or while they slept in thenoon.

    Then nothing came out from their mouths when Our torment came upon them but they said, 'we were unjustpeople.'

    Then undoubtedly, We are necessarily to ask from those to whom Messengers were sent and undoubtedly, Weare necessarily to ask from the Messengers.

    Then surely We shall tell them with Our knowledge and We were not absent.

    And the weighing on that day is sure then those whoso scales are heavy, they are to attain their objects.

    And those whose scales are light, then they are the persons who have put their souls in loss, the recompenseof those excesses which they used to do with Our signs.

    And undoubtedly, We established you in the earth, and have made therein the means of your livelihood. Howlittle thanks you give.

    And undoubtedly, We created you, then made your shapes, then We said to the angels, 'prostrate before Adamthen all those fell prostrate, but Iblis (devil); he was not of those who prostrated.

    He said, 'what prevented you that you did not fall prostrate when I ordered you? Said he, I am better than him,You created me of fire and made him of clay.'

    He said 'get you down from here, it is not for you that you may behave proudly living here, get out, you areamongst the degraded ones.

    Said, he' give me time till the day they are raised up'.

    He said, 'you are given time.'

    Said he, I swear that because You have seduced me, I shall necessarily sit on Your straight path in wait forthem.

    Then, surely I will come near them, from before them and from behind them, and from their right and fromtheir left. And You will not find most of them thankful.

    He said, 'get out from here rejected, banished. Surely those of them who will follow you, I will fill Hell with youall."

    And O Adam! Dwell you and your mate in the Paradise then eat there from where so ever you will, andapproach not this tree, otherwise you will be among transgressors.

    Then the devil (Satan) put evil suggestion in their hearts, so that he might open to them the things of theirshame which were hidden from them and said, 'your Lord has for bidden you from this tree only because youmay not become two angels or become immortals.

    And he swore to them both that, I am well wisher of you both.

    Then he caused them to fall with delusion, then when they tasted that tree, the things of their shame becamemanifest to them, and they began to stick the leaves of the Paradise on their bodies. And their Lord said tothem, 'Did I not forbid you from that tree and tell you that the Devil (Satan) is your manifest enemy'.

    Both of them submitted, 'O Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves, if You forgive us not and have not mercy onus, then certainly we are among losers.'

    He said, 'Get down, in you one is enemy of the another and you are to stay in earth till a fixed time and thereis provision for a time.

    He said, 'you will be alive in it, and will die in it, and therefrom you will be raised.'

    'O children of Adam! Undoubtedly, We have sent down towards you a dress that may cover your shamefulparts and one that be an adornment to you; and the dress of righteousness, that is the best. This is one ofAllah's signs, that I they may be admonished.

    'O children of Adam! Beware! Let not the devil (Satan) tempts you, as he brought your parents out from theparadise, stripping them of their dress that they may see their shameful parts. Undoubtedly, he and his tribesee you whence you see them not. Undoubtedly, We have made the devils friends of those who do not believe.

    And when they commit any indecency, they say, 'we found our forefathers on it and Allah commanded us so.Then say, 'undoubtedly Allah commands not acts of indecency.' Do you allege against Allah what you knownot?

    Say you, My Lord has commanded justice and set your faces aright at the time of each prayer, and worshipHim being exclusively His bondmen. As He originated you so you will return.'

    A party He has shown path and the error of a party has been proved. They have taken the devils (Satan) asguardians leaving Allah and they think that they are guided.

    'O children of Adam! Take your adornment whenever you go to mosque and eat and drink and do not cross thelimit. Undoubtedly, the persons crossing the limit are not liked by Him.

    Say you, 'who has forbidden the adornment of Allah, which He brought forth for His bondmen and the purefoods? Say you. 'That is for the believers in the world and is exclusively for them on the Day of Resurrection.Thus We explain fully the signs for the people who have knowledge.

    Say you, 'My Lord has forbidden the indecencies, which of them are open and which are hidden. And sin, andunjust excesses, and that you associate with Allah that for which He has not sent down any warrant and thatyou say of Allah what you know not.

    And for every people there is a promise (been), then when their term will come, they cannot remain behind foran hour nor they get ahead of it.

    'O children of Adam! If the Messengers come to you from among you, reciting to you My signs! Then whosorefrains from evil and amends, on them there is neither any fear nor any grief.

    And those who have belied Our signs and waxed proud against them, they are the people of Hell, in it they areto abide.

    Then who is more unjust than he who has forged lie against Allah or has belied His signs? They will receivewhat is written in their lot till when Our Messengers came to them for taking away their souls, then they say tothem, 'where are those whom you used to worship beside Allah.' They say, 'they are lost from us.' and theybear witness against their own souls that they were infidels.

    Allah says to them, enter the same Fire where other communities of Jinn and mankind went before you when acommunity enters it, it curses the other; until when all have arrived therein, then the last will say to the first, 'Oour Lord, these led us astray, then award them double torment Of the Fire. He will say, 'all have double, butyou know not.'

    And the first will say to the last, 'you have then not been anyhow better than us, taste therefore the tormentthe recompense of what you did'.

    Those who belied Our signs and waxed proud against them, the gates of heaven will not be opened for them,nor they will enter the paradise until the camel enters-through the eye of a needle. And thus We requite theguilty.

    To them Fire will be the bed and Fire will be the covering. And thus We requite the unjust.

    And those who accepted faith and did good deeds to their strength. We put not burden on anyone beyond hisstrength. They are companions of Paradise; they are to abide therein.

    And We have taken out the rancours from their breasts. Beneath them will low rivers and they will say. 'allpraise belong to Allah Who has guided us to this, and we could not have found the way, if Allah had not guidedus, undoubtedly, the Messengers of our Lord brought truth And it was proclaimed that this is the paradise youhave inherited the reward of your doings.

    And the companions of the Heaven called the companions of the Hell, 'We have found what our Lord promisedus to be true, then have you too found what your Lord promised you to be true? They said, 'yes,' and inbetween them a caller called out: 'the curse of Allah be upon the unjust.'

    Who bar from the path of Allah and desire to make it Crooked and dis-believe in the Hereafter.

    And between Heaven and Hell there is a veil and on the Heights, there shall be some men who will recogniseboth groups by their fore-heads' and call the people of Heaven, '(saying) peace be upon you, 'these have notentered into the Heaven but are greedy for it.

    And when their eyes will turn towards the people of the Hell, they will say 'O' Our Lord! Keep us not with theunjust people.

    And the people of the heights will call to certain men whom they recognise by their foreheads, and will say,'what did your multitude avail you and that in which you took pride'?

    Are these the people on whom you used to swear that Allah would not amend His mercy a least to them? Theywere rather told, enter Paradise, no fear upon you nor any grief.'

    And the companions of the Fire will call the companions of the Heaven that give us some benefit of your wateror of that Allah has provided for you as food. They will say 'undoubtedly, Allah has for bidden these both to theinfidels.'

    Those who made their religion as a plaything and amusement and the life of the world has deceived them.Therefore to day We shall leave them as they had left the conception of meeting of this Day and as they usedto deny Our signs.

    And surely We have brought them a Book which We have detailed with great knowledge, a guidance andmercy to the people who believe.

    What they are looking for, but only this that the result of the sayings of the Book should come before. The daywhen the foretold result will occur, those who had forgotten it before will say. 'Undoubtedly the Messengers ofour Lord had brought the truth, then, is there any intercessor for us who could intercede on our behalf? Orcould We be sent back so that we might do deeds other than that we did before. Surely they put their souls ata loss, and I have been lost from those who used to calumniate.

    Undoubtedly, your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and earth in six days, then established Himself onthe Throne befitting to His Dignity. He covers the night and day by each other following it swiftly, and madethe sun and moon and stars all subservient to His command. Behold! His is the creation and command. Blessedis Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.

    Call on your Lord humbly and secretly. Undoubtedly, He likes not those who cross the limit.

    And spread not mischief in the earth after it has been set right and call on Him fearing and longing. Surely themercy of Allah is nigh to the good doers.

    It is He who sends forth winds bearing good tidings before His mercy till they have carried heavy clouds, Wedrive it towards any dead land, then send down water therewith. Then caused to grow varied fruits there with.Thus shall We bring forth the dead, haply you may accept admonition.

    And the land, which is good, its vegetation comes forth with the command of Allah and from that which is badcomes forth nothing but very little. Thus we explain signs variedly for those who are grateful.

    Undoubtedly, We sent Nuh towards his people then he said. 'O my people! Worship Allah, you have no Godother than He. Surely I fear for you the torment of the Mighty Day.'

    The leaders of his people said, 'undoubtedly, we see you in apparent error.

    Said he, 'O my people no error is in me; but I am Messenger of the Lord of the Worlds'.

    I deliver to you the messages of my Lord and wish your good and I know that from Allah, which you know not.

    And have this surprised you that an admonition has come to you from your Lord through a man from amongstyou, so that he may warn you and you be god-fearing and haply you may be shown mercy?

    Then they belied him, so We delivered him and those with him in the Ark and drowned those who belied Oursigns, certainly that was a blind group.

    And to Aad send Hud from their brethren. He said, `O my people! worship Allah, you have no god other thanHe.' Then do you not fear?

    The leaders of his people said, 'surely, we find you foolish and we surely think you to be one of the liars.

    Said he, 'O my people there is no concern of foolishness with me, I am indeed a Messenger from the Lord ofthe worlds.

    I deliver to you the messages of my Lord and I am your trustworthy well wisher.

    And have this surprised you that an admonition has come to you from your Lord through a man from amongstyou, so that he may warn you? And remember when He appointed you as successors of the people of Huh andincreased the stature of your body; then remember the bounties of Allah that haply you may fare well.

    They said, 'Have you come to us that we should worship Allah alone and leave what our fathers used toworship, then bring you that you are promising for us if you are truthful.

    He said, 'surely there have befallen you the torment and wrath of Lord. Are you disputing with me only aboutthose names which you and your fathers have named for which Allah has sent down no authority? Wait then; Ialso wait with you.

    Then We delivered him and those with him by showing a great mercy from Us and cut off the roots of thosewho used to belie Our signs and they were not believers.

    And to Thamud We sent, Saleh from their brethren. He said. 'O my people! worship Allah, you have no Godother than He. Undoubtedly, there has come to you bright proof from your Lord, this is a she-camel of Allah asign for you. So leave her that she may eat in Allah's earth and touch her not with evil lest a painful tormentwill overtake you.

    And remember when He made you successors of Aad, and assigned you a place in the land that you buildpalaces in its plains, and hew out houses in its mountains. Then remember the bounties of Allah and wandernot in the earth spreading mischief.

    The proud leaders of his people said, 'to the weak Muslims, 'do you know that Saleh is a Messenger of hisLord'? They said, 'We believe in what has been sent with him.

    The proud ones said, 'in that which you belied we disbelieve.'

    Then they hamstrung the she-camel and rebelled against the command of their Lord and said, 'O Saleh, 'bringupon ' us that which you are promising for, if you are a Messenger.

    Then the earthquake took them so in the morning they lay prostrate in their homes.

    Then Saleh turned back his face from them and said, 'O my people! Undoubtedly, I did deliver to you themessages of my Lord, and wished your good, but you do not approve the well wishers.

    And sent Lut, when he said to his people, do you commit that indecency which was ' not committed by any onein, the world before you?

    You rather approach men lustily instead of women on the contrary you people have crossed the limit.

    And there was no answer of his people but this: They said, 'turn them out of your town, these people aspire tobe pure.'

    Then We delivered him and his family saves his wife, she was of those who remained behind.

    And We rained down upon them a rain, then behold how was the end of the sinners?

    And to Madyan We sent Shuaib from there brethren. He said, 'O my people worship Allah, there is no God foryou other than He Undoubtedly, there has come to you bright proof from your Lord, then fill up the measureand weight, and give not the people goods after diminishing and spread not mischief in the earth after fairordering This is good for you, if you believe.

    And sit not on every path threatening and barring from Allah's way to the wayfarers who have believed in Him,and desiring crookedness in it: and remember, when you were few. He multiplied you, and beholds how wasthe end of the mischief-makers.

    And if there is a party of you who believe in that with which I have been sent and a party who believe not,then wait till Allah decides between us; and Allah's decision is the

    The proud Chiefs of his people said, 'O Shoaib, we swear that we will drive you out and the Muslims who arewith you from our town or you come back to our faith'. He said. What, even though we hate it?

    Certainly we shall forge a lie against Allah, if we returned to your faith after Allah has delivered us from it. Andit is not for we Muslims that we should come back in your faith but that Allah Who is our Lord so willed. Theknowledge of our Lord comprehends everything. We have relied on Allah. O our Lord! Decide between us andour people with truth and Your decision is the best.

    And the infidel chiefs of his people said, 'if you follow Shoaib, you shall certainly be the losers.'

    Then an earthquake over took them; so in the morning they fell prostrate in their homes,

    Those who belied Shoaib as if they had never been dwelling in those homes. Those who belied Shoaib were thepeople who were ruined.

    Then Shoaib turned his face from them and said,' O my people, I have already delivered to you the messagesof my Lord and admonished for your good, how then should I lament over infidels.

    And We have not sent any prophet in any town but We seized the people thereof with adversity and sufferingthat anyhow they might lament.

    Then We changed the place of evil with good until they became numerous and said, "no doubt, sufferings andcomforts visited our fathers," then We seized them suddenly while they were unmindful.

    And if the people of the towns had believed and feared, then We would surely have opened upon themblessings from heavens and earth but they belied, then We arrested them on account of their doings.

    Do the people of the towns not fear that Our torment might come upon them at night while they are sleeping?

    Or do the people of the towns not fear that Our torment might come upon them in daylight while they areplaying?

    Are they unaware of the secret devise of Allah? And none becomes fearless against the secret devise of Allahbut the losers.

    And do those who inherited the land after the owners of it not get so much guidance that if We please, Wewould have afflicted them for their sins? And We put a seal upon their hearts so that they hear nothing.

    These are the towns the stories of which We relate to you, and undoubtedly, there came to them theirMessengers with bright proofs, but they were not able to believe what they had first rejected. Thus Allah put aseal upon the, hearts of the infidels.

    And We found not most ' of them true to their words, and necessarily, We found most of them disobedient.

    Then, after them, We sent Moses towards Firawn (Pharaoh) and his Chiefs with Our Signs, but they didinjustice to those signs, see then how was the end of the mischief

    And Moses said, 'O, Firawn! I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Worlds.

    It is my duty not to say anything about Allah but the truth. I have come to you all with sign from your Lord,then let the children of Israel go with me.

    He said, 'If you have come with any Sign, then bring forth if you are truthful.

    Then Moses cast his staff, it atonce became a serpent manifest.

    And he drew forth his hand after putting it into his collar, then it began to shine before the beholders.

    The Chiefs of the people of Pharaoh said, 'this is indeed a magician knowing.'

    He desires to turn you out from your land, what is your advice then?

    They said, 'put him off and his brother, and send into the city men to collect.

    That they may bring to you every magician having knowledge.

    And the magicians came to Pharaoh (Firawn) and said, we shall get some reward if we win.'

    Firawn said, 'yes', and then you shall be near ones.

    They said, 'O Musa, either you throw first or we be the throwers'.

    Musa said, 'you throw,' when they threw, they enchanted the eyes of the people and frightened them andbrought forth a great magic.

    And We revealed to Musa, throw your staff, then suddenly it began to swallow their lying shows.

    Then the truth was established and their works proved vain.

    Then they were laid vanquished here and returned humiliated.

    And the magicians were made to prostrate.

    They said, 'We believe in the Lord of the World.'

    Who is the Lord of Musa and Haroon?

    Firawn said, 'you have believed in Him before I gave you leave. This is indeed a big plot which you all haveplotted in the city that you may drive forth its people therefrom; so now you shall know.'

    I shall assuredly cut off your hands and your feet on alternate sides, and then I shall hang you all.

    They said, 'We are to return towards our Lord.

    And what looked you bad of us, save this that we have believed in the signs of our Lord, when they came tous, O our Lord pour upon us patience and cause us die as Muslims.

    And the Chiefs of the people of Firawn said, 'Do you leave Musa and his people for this that they may spreadmischief in the land and leave you and your gods? He said, 'now we shall kill their sons and let live theirdaughters and surely we are dominant over them.

    Musa said to his people, 'seek the help of Allah and have patience, no doubt, Allah is the owner of the earth.Makes successor whomsoever He pleases of His bondmen. And the end is in the hand of the God-fearing

    They said, 'We were oppressed before your coming to us and since you have come to us', He said, 'it is nearthat your Lord may destroy your foe and make you successor in the land to see then how you act.

    And no doubt, We seized the people of Firawn with years of dearth and scarcity of fruits, haply they mayaccept admonition.

    Then whenever, they pot good, they used to say, 'this is for us', and whenever evil smote them they took it asbad omen with Musa and those with him. Behold!, their ill fortune is with Allah, but most of them do not know.

    And they said, 'whatever the nature of a Sign you may bring to us to enchant us therewith, we are in no way tobelieve you.

    Then We sent upon them the flood, and the locusts and the lice, and the frogs and the blood -distinct signs,then they waxed proud and they were a sinful people.

    And whenever the torment fell upon them, they used to say, 'O Musa, pray for us to your Lord because of thatcovenant of His which is with you. No doubt, if you would remove from us the torment, we would certainlybelieve in you and will send with you the children of Israel.

    But whenever We removed the torment from them for a term to which they were to reach, they retracted.

    We then took vengeance on them, therefore We drowned them in the river, because they belied Our Signs andwere unaware of them.

    And We made a people who were already suppressed, inheritors of the eastern and western parts of that landin which We put Our blessings And the gracious promise of your Lord was fulfilled for the children of Israel, therecompense of their patience. And We destroyed whatever Firawn and his people made and what they used toerect.

    And We brought the children of Israel across the river, and then they came upon a people sitting devotedlybefore their idols. They said, 'O Musa, make for us a God just as they have so many gods. He said, 'Surely youare an ignorant people'.

    This condition in which they are, is of destruction and whatever they are doing is fully void.

    He said, "Shall I seek for you a God other than Allah whereas He has exalted you above all peoples.

    And remember, when We delivered you from the people of Firawn who afflicted you with evil punishment,slaughtering your sons and letting your daughters live. And therein was the great bounty of your Lord.

    And We made Musa a promise of thirty nights and completed adding ten more in them, so the promise of hisLord was completed by forty nights. And Musa said to his brother, Haroon, 'be my vicegerent among my peopleand do right and follow not the way of mischief makers.'

    And when Musa came to Our appointed time and his Lord spoke to him, he submitted, 'O my Lord! Show meYour sight that I may behold You, Said He, you shall never see me; but look towards this mountain, if itremains standing at its place, then soon you will see Me. Then when his Lord made His light shine on themountain, He broke it into pieces; and Musa fell down unconscious. Then when he came to senses, he said,hollowed be you turn towards you and I am the first of the Muslims.

    Said Allah, 'O Musa, I have chosen you from amongst the people by My Messages and by My word. Take thenwhat I have given you and be of the grateful.

    And We wrote for him on the Tablets of everything an admonition, and details of everything, and said, 'OMusa, take it with firmness and bid your people to follow the best of it. Soon I shall show you the abode of thedis-obedients.

    And I shall turn from My Signs those who wish greatness in the earth unjustly, And even if they see all thesigns, they will not believe therein, and if they see the path of guidance, they will not like to walk in it; and ifthey see the path of error, they will be ready to adopt it. This is so because they belied Our Signs and posedthemselves unaware.

    And those who have belied Our Signs and the meeting of the Hereafter their all deeds are wasted. What theywill get in recompense but, the same which, they used to do.

    And after Musa, his people made a calf out of their ornaments, a lifeless body, producing a lowing sound. Didthey not see that neither it talked to them and nor guided them to any way? They took it, and they wereunjust.

    And when they regretted and understood that they had strayed, they said, 'If our Lord have not mercy upon usand forgives us not, then we are ruined'.

    And Musa returned to his people full of anger, peeved, he said, that 'how badly you acted in my place afterme'? 'Did you hasten from the Commends of your Lord'? And he threw down the tablets and began to pull hisbrother (Haroon) towards him catching hold of the hair of his brother head. He said, 'O son of my mother, thepeople deemed me week and were about to kill me, so do not make the enemies laugh over me and place menot with the unjust people'.

    He submitted, 'O my Lord, forgive my brother, and me and cause us to enter Your mercy and You are the mostMerciful of the merciful.

    Undoubtedly, those who had already taken the calf for themselves, soon the wrath and disgrace of their Lordare to reach them in the life of the world. And thus we recompense those who cast aspersions,

    And those who committed evils and thereafter repented and accepted faith, then after that your Lord isForgiving, Merciful.

    And when the anger of Musa was appeased, he took up the tablets, and in their writing there is guidance andmercy for those who fear their Lord.

    And Musa chose seventy men of his people for Our promised appointment, then when earthquake overtookthem, Musa submitted, 'O my Lord, had You wished, then You would have destroyed them and me before. Willyou kill us for what our foolish ones have done'? That is not but your test, whereby you, cause astray whomyou will, and guide whom you will. You are our Protector, You forgive us and have mercy upon us, and you arethe best of the forgivers.

    And prescribe for us in this world good and in the Hereafter, no doubt, we have returned to You. He said, 'Mypunishment, I inflict whom I will, and My mercy encompasses all things. Then soon I shall prescribe it for thosewho fear God and pay the poor due and believe in Our Signs.

    Those who will serve the Messenger, unlettered the, Communicator of hidden news when they will find withthem have written in the Taurat and Injeel. He will bid them to do good and will forbid them from doing evil,and will make lawful for them clean things and will forbid for them unclean things, and will take off from themthat burden and shackles which were upon them. Then those who believe in him and honour him and help himand follow that light which has been sent down with him, they are the persons who attained their objects.

    Say you, 'O mankind'; I am Messenger to you all from Allah to Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens andof the earth. None is to be worshiped except He, He gives life and causes death, believe then in Allah and HisMessenger the unlettered, the Communicator of hidden news that he believes in Allah and His words; andserve him so that you may be guided.'

    And of the people of Musa, there is a community that tells the path of truth and does justice therewith.

    And We divided them in twelve tribes, various communities. And We revealed to Musa, when his people askedhim for water that strike with your staff this rock, then there gushed forth from it twelve Springs. Everycommunity recognised its drinking place. And We made clouds as shades over them, and sent down Mannaand Salwa upon them. Eat of the clean things We provided for you, and they harmed Us not, but they harmedtheir own souls.

    And remember when it was said to them, "Dwell in this town and eat from it whatever you like, and say, 'oursins may be removed and enter the gate, prostrating, We shall forgive you yours sins. Soon We shall give moreto righteous ones.

    Then the unjust of them changed the word contrary to that what was ordered to them, then We sent downupon them torment from the heaven, the recompense of their injustice.

    And ask them the condition of the town that was on the seashore; when they crossed the limit in the matter ofsab-bath, when on the day of Sab-bath their fish came swimming before them, and the day that was not ofSabbath, they did not come. Thus, We used to try them on account of their dis-obedience.

    When a group among them said, 'Why do you admonish those whom Allah is to kill or to chastise with a severetorment'. They said, 'as an excuse before your Lord, and that haply they may fear'.

    Then when they forgot what they had been admonished, We rescued those who forbade from evil, and caughtthe unjust in a vile torment the recompense of their disobedience.

    Then again when they rebelled against the Command of prohibition, We said to them, 'be you apes, drivenaway.'

    And when your Lord proclaimed that necessarily till the Day of Resurrection, He would continue to send suchagainst them who would make them taste evil punishment. Undoubtedly, your Lord necessarily, is swift inretribution, and undoubtedly. He is Forgiving, Merciful.

    And We scattered them into communities in the earth, some of them are righteous and some of themotherwise and We tried them with good things and evil that haply they nay return.

    Then after them came such degenerate successors who inherited the Book. They take the goods of this worldand say, 'now we shall be for given'. And if more goods the like of them came to them, they would take them.Was not the covenant of the Book taken from them, that they should say nothing concerning Allah but thetruth, and they have read that? And undoubtedly, the last abode is better for the God-fearing. Have you thenno wisdom?

    And those who hold fast to the Book and establish prayer. We waste not the reward of the righteous.

    And when We raised mountain over them as that is a canopy and they thought that it will fall upon them, holdfast what We have given to you and remember what is therein, that haply you may be God-fearing.

    And O beloved Prophet remember, when your Lord brought forth from the loin of Adam's children their seedand made themselves witnesses against own selves,' 'Am not your Lord? All said, 'Why not we all bear witness',lest you should say on the Day of Resurrection, that we were not aware of it.

    Or lest you should say, Polytheism was committed by our forefathers before, and we were their offspring! Willyou then destroy us for what was done by wrongdoers?

    And thus We explain Our; signs variedly and in order that, they may return.

    And O beloved Prophet! Relate to them the story of him to whom We gave Our signs then he stepped awayclearly from them, then Satan followed him and he became of the misguided.

    And if We had willed, We would have lifted him on account of Our Signs, but he, clung to the earth andfollowed his desires, then his condition is like a dog, if you attack him, he brings his tongue out and if you leavehim, he brings his tongue out. This is the condition of those who belied Our Signs. So you recount them theadmonition haply they may ponder.

    What a bad example is of those who belied Our Signs, and they did wrong their own souls.

    Whom so Allah guides, he is on the right path, and whom so Allah leads astray, those, they remained in loss.

    Undoubtedly, We have created for Hell many jinn and men, they have hearts, but understand not therewithand the eyes, they see not there with and the ears, they hear not therewith. They are like cattle, nay, moremisguided. They are indeed lying heedless.

    And to Allah belongs all the best names, so call Him by them, and leave those who go out from truth withregard to His names, they will soon get for what they have done.

    And out of Our making are a community who tell the truth and do justice therewith.

    And those who belied Our Signs, soon We shall carry them gradually towards torment whence they will knownot.

    And I will let loose them. Undoubtedly, My secret plan is the firmest.

    Do they not ponder that there is no relation of insanity to their companion? He is only a warner manifests.

    Do they not look into the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and what things that Allah has made, and thatperhaps their term may have come night? Then in what discourse they will believe thereafter

    Whomsoever Allah leads astray none is to guide him. And He leaves them to wander in their Contumacy.

    They ask you concerning the Hour that when it is to come, Say you 'the knowledge of it is only with my Lord,He alone will disclose it at its proper time'. It is lying heavy on the heavens and earth; it shall not come uponyou but of a sudden. They ask you, as you have already investigated it well say you, 'the knowledge of it isonly with Allah', but most people do not know.

    Say you, 'I am not independent for doing good and bad to my own self, but as Allah please. And if I wouldhave known Unseen, then I would have gathered ample good, and no evil would have touched me, I am only awarner and giver of glad tidings to a people who believe.

    It is He Who created you from a single soul, and made therefrom his mate that he may find rest in her, thenwhen the male covered her, she bore a light burden, then carried it about, then when she grew heavy, bothprayed to their Lord, "necessarily if You would give us a child befitting, then undoubtedly, we shall be grateful."

    Then when He gave them a befitting child, they ascribed His associates, in respect of His bestowal but Allah isexalted above from their polytheism.

    Do they associate those who make nothing and they are themselves created?

    And neither they can give any help to them, nor can they help themselves.

    And if you call them towards guidance, they will not follow you. It is same to you whether you call them or youremain silent.

    Undoubtedly, those! Whom you worship besides Allah, are bondsmen like you, then call upon them and theyrespond to you, if you are truthful.

    Have they feet to walk with? Or have they hands to hold with? Or have they eyes to see with? Or have theyears to hear with? Say you, 'Call upon your associates and then try your guile on me and give me no respite'.

    Undoubtedly, my protector is Allah Who sent down the Book and He befriends the righteous.

    And those, whom you worship besides Him, can not help you, nor they help them selves.

    And if you call them towards guidance, they hear not. And you see them looking at you, and they see nothing.

    (O beloved Prophet)! Adopt forgiveness and bid to good and turn away from the Ignorant.

    And (O listener!) if the evil-one (Satan) give you any pricking, then seek refuge of Allah. Undoubtedly, it is HeWho is Hearing, Knowing.

    Undoubtedly, those who fear Allah, when a thought of Satan touches them, become careful, at the same timetheir eyes are opened.

    And those who are brothers of Satan, they drag them on towards error, then they relax not.

    And (O beloved Prophet)! When you bring not to them any Sign, they say, 'Why have you not made it yourself?Say you, 'I follow only what is revealed to me from my Lord; This is an eye opener from your Lord andguidance and mercy for the Muslims.

    And when the Quran is recited, hear it patiently and be silent so that you may have mercy.

    And remember, your Lord within yourself, humbly and fearfully, and without uttering a voice from the tongue,morning and evening and be not you amongst heedless.

    Undoubtedly, those who are with your Lord wax not proud from His worship, and chant His hollowness and toHim they prostrate. [^] (SAJDA) 1





========================================
8.aanfal










    (O beloved Prophet) they ask you concerning the spoils. Say you, 'the spoils belong to Allah and theMessenger; then fear Allah and set things right among yourselves, and obey Allah and His Messenger, if youbelieve.

    Only they are believers whose hearts tremble when Allah is mentioned, and when His Signs are recited tothem, their faith get increased and upon their Lord, they put their trust.

    Those who establish prayer and spend something of what We have provided them.

    It is these the true Muslims. For them are grades with their Lord and forgiveness and an honourable provision.

    As (O beloved Prophet)! Your Lord brought you forth from your house with truth, and undoubtedly, a group ofMuslim was unhappy over it.

    They were disputing with you about the truth after it has become clear, as if they are being driven towardsdeath with their eyes open.

    And remember, when Allah promised you that in both these parties, one is for you, and you wished, that youshould have that in which there is no rankle, and Allah wished that truth be proved truth by His words and tocut off the root of the infidels.

    That He might establish truth as truth and falsify the false, though the guilty might dislike.

    When you were crying for help from your Lord, then He responded to you that I am going to help you with aseries of thousand angels.

    And Allah did this but for your pleasure and in order that your hearts might find contentment; and there is nohelp but from Allah undoubtedly; Allah is Dominant, Wise.

    When He covered you with drowsiness, it was a security from Himself, and sent down water upon you fromheaven that He might cleanse you therewith and remove from you the filth of the devil (Satan) and might givecourage to your hearts and make your steps firm therewith.

    When (O beloved Prophet) your Lord was revealing to the angles that, 'I am with you,' keep ye firm theMuslims. Soon I shall cast terror into the hearts of the infidels, then strike above the necks of the infidels andstrike off every finger tips of them.

    This is because, they opposed Allah and His Messenger, and whosoever opposes Allah and His Messenger, thenundoubtedly, and severe is the torment of Allah.

    This tastes it then and knows that for the infidels is the torment of the Fire.

    'O believers! When you encounter the infidels in the battlefield, turn not your backs to them.

    And whosoever will turn his back to them that day, but for practising the art of war or for the sake of joininghis company, then he returns in the wrath of Allah and his abode is Hell, and what an evil place is to return to.

    Therefore you did not slay them, but Allah slew them. And O beloved Prophet! The dust that you did throw,you did not throw, but Allah threw, and in order that He might confer on the Muslim a better reward than it.Undoubtedly, Allah is Hearing, Knowing.

    This, take it and with it is this that Allah is the weakener of the plot of the infidels.

    'O infidels! If you demand judgement, then this judgement has indeed come to you, And if you desist, it isbetter for you, but if you again make mischief, then We shall again punish you, and your party shall avail younot, however, numerous it be and with it is this that Allah is with the muslims.

    'O believers! Obey Allah ' and His Messenger, and turn not away from him after hearing him.

    And be not like those who say, 'We hear, and they hear not.

    Undoubtedly, the worst of animals in the sight of Allah are those who are the deaf and dumb who have nosense.

    And if Allah had known any good in them, He would have caused them to listen. And if He had made themhear, even then in the end, they would have turned away, turning their faces.

    'O believers! Respond to the calling of Allah and Messenger, when the Messenger calls you for a thing that willgive you life; and know that Allah's command comes between man and his heart's desire and this that you areto be raised towards Him.

    And remain fearing that calamity which will never fall exclusively upon those among you who do wrong. Andknow that severe is the torment of Allah.

    And remember, when you were few down trodden in the land, and were fearful, lest the people should snatchyou away, then He gave you shelter, and strengthened you with His help, and provide you with good things,that haply you might be thankful.

    'O believers! Betray not Allah and Messenger and nor commit defalcation in your trusts knowingly.

    And know that your wealth and your children are all a trial, and with Allah is the great reward.

    'O believers! If you will fear Allah, He will grant you that by which you may be able to distinguish between rightand wrong and will remove off your evils and will forgive you. And Allah is owner of great Grace.

    And (O beloved Prophet)! Remember, when the infidels were plotting against you, to confine you or to slay youor to drive you forth. And they were plotting their own and Allah was devising His Own and Allah's devise is thebest.

    And when Our verses are recited to them, then they say, 'yes, we have heard', if we wished, we could certainlyutter the like of this. It is not, but the stories of the ancients.

    And when they said, 'O Allah, if this Quran indeed be the truth from You then rain down upon us stones fromheaven or bring down upon us! Any painful chastisement.

    And Allah is not one to chastise them, till ('O beloved Prophet) you are in their midst. And Allah is not tochastise them, whilst they are begging forgiveness.

    And what have they that Allah should not chastise them, when they are hindering from the sacred mosque, andthey are not its guardian. Its guardians are the pious ones only, but most of them know not.

    And their prayer at the Holy House is nothing but whistling and clapping. Then taste the torment now, therecompense of their infidelity.

    Undoubtedly, the infidels spend their wealth to prevent from the path of Allah, they will spend it now, thenagain they will regret on it, then will be overpowered. The infidels shall be gathered towards hell.

    In order that Allah may separate the impure from the pure, and putting the impure one upon the other, allpiling them together cast them into the hell it is they who are the losers.

    Say you to the infidels, if they now desist, that which is past will be forgiven. But if they repeat the same thenthe precedence of the former people has already gone.

    And fight them on till there remains not any mischief and the entire religion be only of Allah; then if they desist,then Allah is seeing their deeds.

    And if they turn back then know that Allah is your Protector, what an excellent Protector and what an excellentHelper.

    And know that whatever spoil of war take, then one fifth of it belongs exclusively to Allah and to theMessenger, and to the kindred and the orphans and the needy and the wayfarer, if you have believed in Allahand what We sent down upon Our bondman on the Day of Decision the day when the two armies met. AndAllah can do everything.

    When you were on the hither side of the valley and the infidels on the yonder side, and the Caravan was belowyou (On the Coast Plain), and if you would have made any mutual promise, surely you would not have reachedon appointed time, but this has happened in order that Allah might fulfil the work which is to be done; so thatwhoever was to perish might perish with proof; and whoever was to survive might survive with proof. Andundoubtedly, Allah is Hearing, Knowing.

    When (O' Beloved Prophet) Allah showed the infidels few to you in your dream. And (O' Muslims) if He hadshown them numerous then, certainly you would have shown timidity and would have quarrelled about thematter, but Allah saved you Undoubtedly, He knows the thoughts in the breasts.

    And when at the time of encounter, the infidels were shown to you as few, and made you appear few in theireyes, so that Allah might fulfil the work which, is to be done. And towards 'Allah is the return of all affairs.

    'O believers! When you encounter any army, then stand firm, and remember Allah much, that you may attainthe goal.

    And obey Allah and His Messenger, and dispute not with one another, otherwise you will show timidity, andyour tied strength will depart from you and be patient. Verily Allah is with the patient.

    And be not like those who came out of their homes, boastfully and to be seen of men, and barring from Allah'sway. All their works are under the Control of Allah.

    And when the devil (Shaitan) decked their work fair in their sight, and said, 'No man is to prevail against youtoday, and you are under my protection'. Then when both armies came in front of each other, he ran upon hisheels and said 'I am quit of you, I see what you see not, I fear Allah' and severe is the torment of Allah.

    When the hypocrites and those in whose hearts there is disease used to say these, muslims are proud of theirreligion'. And whosoever relies upon Allah, then undoubtedly, Allah is Dominant, Wise.

    And if you could see, when the Angels take away the souls of the infidels, they, are smiting their faces and.their backs, and taste the torment of burning.

    This is in recompense of what your hands have sent on ' before and Allah is not unjust unto His bondmen.

    In the manner of people of Firawn (Pharaoh) and those before them they disbelieved in the signs of Allah, thenAllah seized them for their sins. Undoubtedly Allah is Strong, Severe in torment

    This is so because Allah does not change the favour that He has conferred upon a people, until they changethemselves; and verily Allah Hears, Knows.

    In the manner of the people of Firawn (Pharaoh) and those before them. They, belied the signs of their Lordthen We destroyed them for their sins, and We drowned the people of Firawn, and they were all unjust.

    Undoubtedly, the worst of beasts in the Sight of Allah, are those who committed infidelity and would notbelieve,

    Those with whom you had entered into a covenant, then they break their covenant every time and do not fear.

    Therefore, if you find them anywhere in war, kill them in such a manner that their remaining ones may be putto flight. Haply they may be admonished.

    If you fear treachery from any people, throw back to them their covenant on equal basis Undoubtedly, thetreacherous are not liked by Allah.

    And let the infidels never boast that they have gone out of hand. Undoubtedly, they cannot frustrate.

    And keep ready for them the strength as you can, and as many of horses as you can, whereby you may putterror in the hearts of those who are enemies of Allah and of yours and in the hearts of some others, besidesthem whom you know not; Allah Knows them. And whatever you will spend in the path of Allah, shall be repaidto you in full and in no way you will be in loss.

    And if they incline towards peace, then incline you also and put trust in Allah. Undoubtedly, He is the OneHearing, Knowing

    If they intend to deceive you, then Allah is sufficient for you. He it is Who gave, strength to you with His helpand with Muslims.

    And He put affection in their hearts. If you had spent all that is in the earth you could not have put affection intheir hearts but Allah have united their hearts. Undoubtedly! It is He, Dominant, Wise.

    'O Prophet! The communicator of the hidden news! Allah suffices you and all these Muslims who followed you.

    'O Communicator of the hidden news! Urge the Muslims to wage holy war. If there will be twenty of youpatient, they will overcome two hundred, and there be hundred of you, they will overcome a thousand infidels,because they do not understand.

    Now Allah has lightened your burden, and He knows that you are weak. Then if there be a hundred of youpatient, they shall overcome two hundred; and if there he a thousand of you, they shall overcome twothousand by the command of Allah. And Allah is with the patient.

    It is not befitting to any Prophet that he should make captive to infidels, until he has immensely shed theirblood in the land. You desire the goods of the world; and Allah desires the Here after. And Allah is Dominant,Wise.

    If Allah would not have written a thing before, then O Muslims! A great torment would have come to you forwhat you took as ransom from the infidels.

    Then eat of what you have obtained as spoil of war, lawful and pure, and remain fearing Allah. Verily Allah is 'Forgiving, Merciful.

    'O Communicator of the hidden news (Prophet) say to the prisoners in your hands, 'If Allah will find any goodin your hearts, then He will give you better than what has been; taken from you and will forgive you' And Allahis Forgiving, Merciful.

    And 'O beloved Prophet! If they will intend to be treacherous to you, then they have already dealttreacherously with Allah before; therefore He gave so many under your control. And Allah is. Knowing, Wise.

    Undoubtedly, those who believed and left their hearth and homes for Allah and fought with their wealth andtheir lives in the way of Allah, and those who gave shelter and helped they are heirs one of another. And thosewho believed and did not emigrate, you have no duty to their inheritance unless they emigrate, if they seekhelp from you in the matter of the religion, then it is obligatory upon you to help them, but against a peoplebetween whom and you there is an agreement. And Allah is seeing your doing.

    And the infidels are heirs one of another. If you will not do such, then there shall be in the land mischief andgreat disorder.

    And those who believed and emigrated and fought in the way of Allah and those who gave shelter and helpedthey are true believers. For them is forgiveness and honourable provision.

    And those who believed afterwards and emigrated and waged the holy war with you, they also are of you. Andthe blood relations are nearer to one another in the Book of Allah. Undoubtedly Allah knows all things








===================================
9.tauba






    This is declaration of disassociation from Allah and His Messenger to those idolaters with whom you hadentered into a contract and they did not keep it.

    Then go about in the land for four months and know that you can not tire Allah and Allah is to humiliate theinfidels.

    And there is proclamation from Allah and His Messenger to all People on the day of Great Pilgrimage that Allahis rid of the polytheists and so His Messenger, if you then repent it is then good for you, and if you turn you'face then know that you cannot tire Allah. And give good tidings to infidels of a painful torment.

    But those associators with whom you had covenanted they did not detract anything in your Contract, and didnot help any one against you then fulfil their covenant till the promised day. Undoubtedly, Allah loves the piousones.

    Then when the sacred months have passed, slay the associators wherever you find them and catch them, andconfine them and sit in wait for them at every place; again if they repent and establish prayer and give thepoor-due then leave their way. Verily Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    And 'O beloved Prophet'. If any of the associators ask your protection, then give him protection that he mayhear the word of Allah then convey him to his place of security. This is because they are the people ignorant.

    How there shall be any covenant for the associators with Allah and His Messenger but those with whom youcovenanted near the Sacred Mosque! Then as long as they keep their covenant for you, you should also standfor them. Undoubtedly, Allah loves the pious ones.

    How (Can it be) their condition is this that if they prevail against you, then neither they would care forrelationship nor for agreement. They please you with their mouths, and their hearts refuse, and most of themare disobedient.

    They have sold the Signs of Allah for a meagre price, and then they barred from His path. Undoubtedly, theydo evil deeds.

    They neither have regard of relationship or agreement in any Muslim. And they are the transgressors.

    Again if they repent and establish prayer and pay the poor-due (Zakat) then they are your brothers, in faith.And We explain the signs in detail for a people who know.

    If they break their oaths after their covenant, and taunt at your religion, then fight with the leaders of infidelity.Undoubtedly, their oaths are nothing. Haply they may desist.

    Will you not fight with a people who have broken their oaths and resolved to turn out the Messenger, althoughthe beginning is from them? Do you fear them? Linen Allah is Most Worthy that you should fear Him if youbelieve (Him).

    Then fight them, Allah will torment them at your hands and will humiliate them and will help you against them,and will heal the breasts of the believers.

    And will remove the anger of their hearts, and Allah relent of whomsoever He pleases, and Allah is Knowing,Wise.

    Are you in this conception that you would be left alone, and Allah has not yet made known those of you whowill struggle and will not take any one as a confident except Allah and His Messenger and the muslims. Allah isAware of what you do?

    It is not for the associators that they should inhabit the mosque of Allah, bearing witnesses of infidelity againstthemselves. Their entire works are destroyed, and they shall abide in the Fire.

    They only inhabit the mosques of Allah who believe in Allah and the Last Day and establish prayer and pay thepoor-due (Zakat) and fear none but Allah, therefore it is near that these people may be among the guidedones.

    Then do you hold the offering of water to the pilgrims and service of the Sacred Mosque equal to one whobelieved in Allah and the Last Day and struggled in the path of Allah? They are not equal in the sight of Allah,And Allah guides not the unjust people.

    Those who believed and emigrated and fought with their wealth and lives in the path of Allah have the highestrank near Allah. And they are they who reached to their goal.

    Their Lord does give them glad tidings of His Mercy and of His Pleasure and of those gardens wherein there islasting bliss for them.

    They will abide there in forever. Undoubtedly, there is great reward with Allah.

    'O Believers! Take not your fathers and brothers for friends, if they prefer infidelity over faith. And who so ofyou will be-friend them, then they are they who are unjust.

    Say you 'If your fathers, and your sons and your brothers and your wives and your clan and the wealth of yourearning and the trade of which you fear loss and the houses of your choice, these things are dearer to youthan Allah and His Messenger and the struggling in His path, then wait till Allah brings His Command. And Allahguides not the disobedients.

    Undoubtedly, Allah did help you at many places and on the day of Hunain when you had boasted on yourmultitude, it availed you nothing, and the land being so vast, became straitened to you, then you turned yourbacks retreating

    Then Allah sent down His Calm upon His Messenger and upon Muslims, and He sent down the hosts that youdid not see and chastised the infidels. And this is the punishment of the rejecters.

    Thereafter Allah will relent whom He pleases. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

    'O believers! The associators are altogether unclean, then let them not approach the sacred Mosque after thisyear. And if you fear poverty, then soon Allah shall enrich you of His bounty if He pleases. Verily, Allah isKnowing, Wise.

    Fight those who believe not in Allah, and in the Last Day, and accept not as unlawful what Allah and Hismessenger made unlawful, and follow not the true faith that is to say those who were Coven the Book untilthey pay the required tax with their own hands being brought low.

    And the Jews, said, "Uzair is the son of Allah" and the Christians said 'Masih (Christ) is the son of Allah' Thesethings, they utter with their mouths. They imitate the sayings of the infidels before them. Allah assail them,whither they are perverting?

    They have taken their priests and monks as gods besides Allah and also Masih son of Maryam; and they wereCommanded not but this that that they worship only one Allah; none is to be worshipped except He. Hallowedbe He from their polytheism.

    They wish to put off the light of Allah with their mouths and Allah will not agree but to perfect His light, thoughthe infidels may dislike it.

    It is He who has sent His Messenger with guidance and true religion that He may make it prevail over allreligions, though the infidels may dislike it.

    'O believers! Verily many of the priests and monks devour the wealth of the people wrongfully and bar from thepath of Allah. And those who hoard up gold and silver and spend not in the path of Allah give them the goodtidings of a painful torment.

    The day when they shall be heated in the fire of the Hell, then their foreheads and sides and backs shall bebranded therewith. This is what you had hoarded for yourselves, now taste the hoarding.

    Undoubtedly, the number of months with Allah is twelve in the Book of Allah since the day He made theHeavens and Earth four of them are sacred. This is the right religion, then wrong not yourselves in thesemonths, and fight the infidels at all times, as they fight with you, all times And know that Allah is with the piousones.

    Their postponement of the months are not but an increase in infidelity, with which the infidels are misguided,they make it lawful one year and hold it unlawful another year, that they may make up the number which Allahhas sanctified, and make lawful what Allah has forbidden. Their vile deeds seem fair in their eyes and Allahguides not the infidel

    'O Believers! What happened to you, that when it is said to you, 'Go forth in the way of Allah, you sit down onthe earth heavily'? Have you chosen the life of this work in preference to the Hereafter? And the goods of theliving worlds in comparison with that of the Hereafter is nothing but little.

    If you will not march forth, He will punish you with a severe punishment and will replace you by anotherpeople, and you can do no harm to Him. And Allah can do every thing

    If you help him (The beloved Prophet) not, then no doubt, Allah helped him, when on account of the mischiefof the infidels, he was to go out with only two souls, when they both were in the Cave, and when he said to hiscompanion 'Grieve not, no doubt Allah is with us', then Allah sent down His satisfaction on him, and helped himwith armies which you did not see, and put down the words of the infidels. It is the word of Allah, alone whichis supreme, and Allah is Dominant, Wise.

    March forth with light soul, or with heavy heart and struggle in the way of Allah with your wealth and lives. It isbetter for you, if you know.

    If there had been any near gain, or an average journey, then they would have certainly gone with you, but thehard journey seemed too long to them, and now they will swear by Allah, that if we had been able, then wewould have surely gone with you. They ruin their souls, and Allah knows that undoubtedly, they are necessarilyliars.

    Allah forgive you, why did you then permit them, till the true one had not become manifest to you and the liarshad not become clear?

    And those who would believe in Allah and the Last Day would not ask leave of you from struggling with theirwealth and their lives. And Allah knows well the duty-bound.

    Those only ask you this leave who do not believe in Allah and the Last Day and their hearts are in doubts, thenin their doubts they waver.

    Had they willed to go forth, they would have made some preparation for it; but God disliked their rousing, soHe made them lethargic, and it was said to them 'remain sitting with those who sit'.

    If they would have come out among you, they would have added you nothing except trouble and would haverun to and from in your midst seeking to cause sedition among you, and there are among you, their spies. AndAllah Knows well the unjust.

    No doubt, they already sought to create disorder before, and turned the plans upside down for you O' Beloved!Till the truth came and Allah's command appeared.

    And any one among them submits before you like this, 'Give me leave, and put me not in trial', Listen, theyhave already fallen into trial. And undoubtedly, the hell has surrounded the infidels.

    If good befalls you, then it hurts them, and if any misfortune comes to you, then they say 'We had already setright our works before, and turn back rejoicing.

    Say you 'nothing shall reach us, but what Allah has ordained for us. He is our Protector, and the Muslimsshould keep trust in Allah only.

    Say you, 'What you are waiting for us but one of the two goods' ? And we are waiting for you that Allah shallafflict you with a torment from Himself, or with our hands. Now wait then, we are also waiting with you'.

    Say you, 'Spend willingly or unwillingly, it shall not be accepted from you. No doubt, you are a peopledisobedient.

    And what they spend. Its acceptance was not barred. But because they rejected Allah and His Messenger andcome not to prayers but lazily, and spend not but unwillingly

    Then let not their wealth and their children astonish you. Allah only intends to punish them with these things inthe life of the world and that their souls may depart while they are infidels.

    They swear by Allah that they are from amongst you and they are not from amongst you, yes they are afraid.

    If they find a place of refuge, or cave or a place to creep into, they will turn there to rushing headlong.

    And of them, some one is he who blames you with regard to the distribution of charities, then if they get something of these, they are pleased, and if they get not, then they are angry.

    What a good it had been, if they would have been pleased with what Allah and His Messenger had given themand would have said 'Sufficient for us is Allah', Now Allah is to give us of His Bounty, and so the Messenger ofAllah. To Allah only we lean.

    The poor-due (Zakat) is only for those who are poor and needy and those who collect it, and for those whosehearts are to be conciliated for Islam, and for the freeing of slaves, and for debtors, and for spending in theway of Allah and for the traveller. This has been ordained by Allah. And Allah is Knowing, Wise.

    And of them some are those who hurt the Prophet and say, 'He is an ear, say 'He is an ear for good of you,believes in Allah and believes the words of Muslims, and is a mercy for those who are Muslims among you.' Andthose who hurt the Messenger, for them is the painful torment.

    They swear by Allah before you may be pleased and Allah and His Messenger had greater right, that theyshould please him, if they had faith.

    Are they not aware that whoso opposes Allah and His Messengers then for him is the fire of the Hell in whichhe will abide for ever? This is the great humiliation

    The hypocrites fear lest a Surah (Chapter) should be sent down to them informing them, what is in theirhearts. Say you 'Mock on, truly Allah is about to reveal what you fear.'

    And O' beloved Prophet! If you ask to them, they will say 'We were only jesting and playing'. Say you; 'Do youmock at Allah and His signs and His Messengers?'

    Make no excuses, you have already become disbeliveers after being muslims. If We forgive some one of you,then We shall chastise others because they were guilty.

    The hypocrites' men and women are the birds of the same feather; they bid evil and forbid from doing good,and (they) keep their hands closed. They have left Allah then Allah has left them. No doubt the hypocrites arethe confirmed disobedients.

    Allah has promised the hypocrites men and hypocrites' women and infidels, the fire of the Hell, wherein theywill abide forever. That is sufficient for them, and the curse of Allah is upon them, and for them is the lastingtorment.

    As those before you, they were mightier than you in strength, and more abundant in wealth and children. Theyenjoyed their share then you enjoy your share just as those before you enjoyed their share, and you indulgedingesting just as they indulged. Their works are wasted in the world and the Hereafter, and they are the peoplewho are losers.

    Have they not received the news of those before them the people of Nooh, and Aad and Thamud, and thepeople of Ibrahim, and the men of Madian and the overthrown towns? Their Messengers had brought to thembright evidences; then it was not befitting to Allah that He might have wronged them, but they werethemselves unjust to their souls.

    And the Muslim men and women are friends to one another, bid for good and forbid evil and establish prayerand pay the poor-due (Zakat) and obey Allah and His Messenger. These are they on whom soon Allah will havemercy. Undoubtedly Allah is, Dominant, Wise.

    Allah has promised to Muslim men and Muslim women Gardens under which rivers flow, wherein they shallreside forever and clean houses in the inhabitable gardens. And the pleasure of Allah is the greatest. This is theachievement of the greater Goal.

    'O Communicator of the hidden news, (Prophet) fight against the infidels and the hypocrites and be strict tothem Their destination is Hell and what an evil place of return.

    They swear by Allah that they said it not, and no doubt, necessarily they uttered the word of infidelity andbecame infidels after accepting Islam and they had desired that Which they could not get; and what they feltbad, only this that Allah and His Messenger has enriched them out of His grace; then if they repent, it is goodfor them, and if they turn their faces then Allah will chastise them with a severe torment in the world and theHereafter and on the earth they shall have neither any supporter nor any helper.

    And of them, there are some who had covenanted with Allah that if He will give us out of His grace then weshall surely give in charity and we shall surely become good men.

    Then when Allah gave them out of His grace, they became niggardly of it and turned away turning their faces.

    Therefore after it Allah put hypocrisy in their hearts, until the Day they meet Him -the recompense of that theyacted against what they had promised to Allah and the recompense of that they used to lie.

    Are they not aware that Allah Knows the secrets of their hearts and their whisper and Allah is the well Knowerof all hidden things?

    Those who blame those muslims who give charity willingly and those who get not but with their hard labour, sothey laugh at them. Allah will punish them for their laughing and for them is the painful.

    Ask you forgiveness for them or ask not. If you will ask forgiveness for them seventy times, Allah will neverforgive them. This is because that they have rejected Allah and His Messenger. And Allah guides not thedisobedients.

    Those who were left behind delighted at this that they remained sitting behind the Messenger and they did notlike that they may fight in the way of Allah with their wealth and lives and said Come not out in this treat' sayyou 'the fire of the Hell is the hottest! In any manner they would have understood!

    Let them laugh little and weep much, in recompense what they used to earn.

    Then if, O beloved Prophet! Allah returns you to a party of them, and they ask you leave to go forth to fight,then say you 'Never shall you march forth with me, nor ever fight with any enemy of me. You chose to sit athome the first time, then remain sitting with those who remained behind.'

    And pray you never over any of their dead, and not stand over his grave. No doubt, they rejected Allah and HisMessenger and died while they were disobedient.

    Be not astonished over their wealth and children Allah only intends to punish them there with in this world, andthat they part with their souls while they are infidels.

    And when any Sura (Chapter) is sent down, that believe in Allah and fight with His Messenger, then the men ofcapability among them ask leave of you and say 'Leave us to remain with those who sit behind'.

    They like that they should remain with the women left behind, and their hearts are sealed up, so that theyunderstand nothing.

    But the Messenger and those who believed with him, fought with their wealth and lives. And it is they forwhom are goods, and it is they who reached to their goal.

    Allah has prepared for them Gardens under which rivers flow; they shall abide forever therein. This is theattainment of supreme object

    And there came excuse seekers from the villagers in order that leave may be given to them, and those who liedto Allah and His Messenger sat behind. Soon a painful torment shall befall to the infidels of them.

    There is not any fault on the weak, and on the sick and nor on those who are not capable to spend, when theyare sincere to Allah and His Messenger. There is no way against the good-doers. And Allah is Forgiving,Merciful.

    Nor on those who came to you that you may provide carriage to them, you said have nothing whereon tomount you' so they return back and their eyes overflow with tears because of this grief that they could not findthe ability to spend.

    The accountability is only of those who ask leave of you and they are rich. They liked to sit behind with thewomen and Allah has sealed up their hearts; so they know nothing.

    They will make excuses to you when you will return to them. Say you, 'make no ' excuses, we will neverbelieve you, Allah has already given your news to us. And now Allah and His messenger will see your worksthen you will be returned to Him Who knows all unseen and visible, He will tell you what you used to do.

    Now they will swear by Allah before you, when you will return back to them in order that you may not mind ofthem, then yes, mind them not. They are wholly filthy and their destination is Hell a recompense what theyused to earn.

    They swear before you that you may be pleased with them. But if you are pleased with them, then no doubt,Allah will not be pleased with a people dis-obedient.

    They villagers are more stubborn in infidelity and hypocrisy and they are only worthy of this that they remainignorant of the commands which, Allah has sent down upon His messenger. And Allah is knowing, Wise.

    And among the villagers some are those who regard hat they spend in the way of Allah as fine, and remainwaiting of misfortunes coming to you. On them is the evil turn. And Allah Hears. Knows.

    And among the villagers some are those who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and regard what they spend as' approaches to Allah and means of taking blessings of the messenger. Yes, that is the means of nearness forthem to enter into His mercy. Undoubtedly! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful,

    And the first and foremost emigrants and helpers and those who followed them with good. Allah is pleasedwith them and they are pleased with Allah and for them, He has prepared gardens under which rivers flow.This is the great success.

    And some villagers around you are hypocrites and some of the dwellers of Madina too, hypocrisy has becometheir habit. You know them not. We know them. We will soon torment them twice. Then they will be resumedto a great torment.

    And there are some others who acknowledge their sins and mixed up a good deed with another evil. It is nearthat Allah may accept their repentance. No doubt Allah is Forgiving. Merciful.

    'O beloved prophet! Realise the poor-due (Zakat) out of their wealth. to purify them and cleanse themtherewith and pray good for them. No doubt. your prayer is solace for their hearts. And Allah Hears. Knows.

    Are they not aware that only Allah accepts the repentance of His bondmen and takes the charities in Hisauthoritative Hand Himself, and that it is Allah Who is the Relenting. The Merciful.

    And say you. 'work on, now Allah will behold your work and so His messenger and the muslims. And you willsoon be returned to Him Who knows all unseen and visible. Then He will inform you what you used to do.

    And some other have been deferred to Allah's commandment. Whether He may torment them or may accepttheir repentance. And Allah is Knowing Wise

    And those who have built a mosque in order to injure and because of infidelity and to cause dissension amongmuslims and as an ambush for him who is already against Allah and His messenger from before. And they willsurely swear that we desired only good. And Allah bears witness that they are certainly liars.

    You stand never in that mosque. No doubt the mosque whose foundation has been laid on righteousness fromthe very first day is worthy that you may stand therein. There in are those who desire to be well purified andAllah loves the pure.

    Then is he who laid foundation upon the fear of Allah and His pleasure better or he who laid his foundation onthe brink of a falling pit, then he fell with it in the fire of the Hell? And Allah does not give way to the peopleunjust.

    The building, which they have built, will continue to waver in their hearts unless their hearts may cut intopieces. And Allah is Knowing, Wise.

    No doubt. Allah has purchased from the muslims their lives and their belongings against this return, that forthem is Paradise, they fight in the way of Allah, then they kill and are killed; true promise on His generousresponsibility in the Taurah and the Injeel and the Quran. And who is, true to his words than Allah'? Rejoicethen in your trade ' which you have done with Him And it is this which is, the great triumph.

    Those who repent, those who worship, those who praise, those who fast, those who bow, those who prostrate,those who tell good and forbid evil and those who watch the limits of Allah. And give you glad tidings toMuslims.

    It is not worthy for the prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for the associators, even though they arerelatives, after it has been made clear to them that they are men of Hell.

    And Abraham's asking forgiveness for his father was not but on account a promise, he had made to Him Butwhen it was made clear to him that he is an enemy of Allah, he dis-associated him self from him No doubt,Abraham is a most lament, clement.

    And it is not the attribute of Allah that He should lead astray any people after He has guided them. Until Hemakes clear to them as to what they have to guard against. Undoubtedly, Allah knows every thing.

    Assuredly! It is Allah for Whom is the Kingdom of heavens and earth. He gives life and causes death. And youhad no protector nor helper beside Allah.

    No doubt, blessings of Allah turned towards the Communicator of the hidden news (prophet) and thoseemigrants and helpers who sided with him in the hour of hardship. After it that the hearts of some of themwere nearly to be swerved aside. Then He turned towards them with blessing. Undoubtedly. To them He isMost Kind. Merciful.

    And to the three who were left behind, so much so that the earth being so vast became strait to them, andthey became tired of their own lives, and they believed that there is no refuge from Allah but with Him. Then,He accepted their repentance that they might remain repenting. Undoubtedly, it is Allah Who is Relenting, theMerciful.

    'O believers! Fear Allah and be with the truthful.

    It was not proper for the inhabitants of Madina and the villagers around them to remain sitting behind themessenger of Allah, nor that they should consider their own lives more dear than his life. This is so becausewhatever they face as thirst or distress or hunger in the way of Allah, and wherever they tread a place whichenrages the infidels for all these things, good deed is written for them. Assuredly Allah wastes not the rewardof the good.

    And whatever they spend, small or great and the valley they cross, all is written for them so that Allah mayrecompense them for their best deeds.

    And it is not possible for Muslims that all should come out. Then why should not a party from each groupshould come out that they may gain understanding of religion and warn their people after coming back tothem, haply they may guard themselves.

    'O believers' fight the infidels who are close to you, and let them find in you harshness and know that Allah iswith the duty-bound.

    Whenever a Sura is sent down. Then anyone of them begins to say, 'Which of you has this increased in faith?Then as for those who believe, it has increased them in faith. And they are rejoicing.

    And as for those in whose hearts there is disease, it has increased them in filthiness upon filthiness and theydied while they are infidels.

    Do they not observe that? They are being tried every year once or twice. Even then neither they repent noraccept admonition.

    And whenever any Sura is sent down, they begin to look at on each other. Whether any one watches you?Then they turn away. Allah has turned away their hearts, because they are a people who do not understand.

    Assuredly there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves, heavy upon him is your suffering;ardently desirous of your welfare, and to Muslims is most Kind and Merciful.

    If then they turn their faces, then say you, 'Allah is sufficient for me, none is to be worshiped except He. I putmy trust in Him, and He is the 'Lord of Supreme Throne.'








==============================
10.yunus




    Alif-Lam-Ra. These are the verses of the Book of wisdom.

    Have the people wondered that We sent down revelation to a man among them, warn the people, and giveglad tiding to the believers, that they have the position of truth with their Lord? The infidels said, 'This is amanifest sorcerer.

    No doubt, your Lord is Allah Who made the heavens and earth in six days, then seated Himself on the Thronebefitting to His Dignity, He plans the work. No intercessor is there but after His leave. This is Allah your Lord,then worship Him. Do you then not ponder?

    To Him you all are to return. The promise of Allah is true. No doubt, He creates for the first time, then He shallreproduce it after destruction, so that He may give the reward of justice to those who believed and did gooddeeds. And for the infidels the boiling drink and painful torment, the recompense of their infidelity

    It is He who has made the sun shining, and the moon glittering, and appointed for it stages, so that you mayknow the number of years and calculation. Allah has not created that, but in truth. He explains fully the signsfor the people of knowledge.

    No doubt the coming of night and day alternately and whatever Allah has produced in the heavens and earth,therein are the signs for those who fear.

    No doubt, those who hope not to meet Us and are well pleased with the life of the world and are contentedwith it, and those who are neglectful of Our signs.

    Their abode is Hell'-the recompense of their earnings.

    No doubt, who believed and did good deeds, their Lord will guide them on account of their faith; beneath themrivers will be flowing in the gardens of delight.

    Their prayer therein shall be this, 'Sanctity to you, O Allah, and the opening word at the time of their greetingis 'peace' and the end of their prayer is, 'all praise be to Allah, Who is the Lord of entire worlds.

    And if Allah would have hasten evil to people as they hasten for the good, then their promised term would havealready been completed. Therefore, We leave those who hope not to meet Us That they wander in theircontumacy.

    And when trouble touches man, he calls Us lying down and sitting down and standing up: then when Weremove his ' trouble, he passes on as if he never called Us at the time of any trouble touching him Thus it hasbeen made fair seeming to the extravagants their deeds.

    No doubt, We ruined generations before you, when they crossed the limit, and their messengers came to themwith bright evidences. And they were not such as to believe. Thus, We recompense the guilty.

    Then We made you to succeed after them, that We may see how you act.

    And when Our clear signs are recited unto them, then those who hope not to meet Us begin to say, 'bring aQuran other than this, or alter it. Say you, 'it is not for me to change it on my own accord. I only follow, whatis revealed to me if I disobey my Lord, then I fear the torment of the great Day.

    Say you. 'If Allah had willed, then I would have not recited it to you. Nor would He have made it known to you;then I have already passed a portion of my life amongst you before it. Have you then no wisdom?'

    Then who is more unjust than one who forges lie against Allah or belies His signs? Undoubtedly. The guilty willhave no good.

    And they worship besides Allah that which neither harms them nor does any good and say, 'these are ourintercessors with Allah'. Say you, 'Do you tell to Allah the thing which is not in His Knowledge either in heavensor on earth. Holy is He and exalted is He from their association.

    And the people were only one nation, then differed. And if a word from your Lord has not occurred before,then their differences would have been decided between them.

    And they say, 'why has not a sign been sent down to them from their Lord? Say you, 'the hidden is for Allah,now wait, I am also waiting with you.'

    And We make the men to taste mercy after any trouble had touched them, forthwith they begin to play trickwith Our signs. Say you; 'the secret planning of Allah is swiftest.' No doubt, Our angels are writing yourdevices.

    It is He Who conveys you on the land and sea, Until when you are in the ship and they sail with them with afair breeze and they rejoiced there at, there came upon them a hurricane wind and the waves from every sideovertook them. And they thought that they were encircled, then at that time, they call Allah being purely Hisbondmen, that if You would save us from this, we shall then surely be thankful.

    Then when Allah saves them, they forthwith begin to commit excesses in the land wrongfully. O people! Yourexcesses are only against your own selves, enjoy it till your living in the world, then you are to return towardsUs, at that time We will inform you what you used to do.

    The example of the life of the world is like that water which, We have sent down from the sky, on account ofwhich the vegetation of earth came out in abundance of which men and cattle eat, till, when the earth took onits ornament and was fully adorned, and its owners thought that it is under their authority; there came upon itOur command by night or by day, then We made it mown down as if it had not existed yesterday. Thus, Weexplain fully Our signs for a people who reflect.

    And Allah calls towards the home of peace. And guides whomsoever He will to the straight path.

    For the good-doers there is good and even more than that. And neither darkness nor insult will cover theirfaces. It is they who are the inhabitants of Paradise and they will abide therein for ever.

    And those who earned evils, then the recompense of the evil is the like of it, and insult will cover them. Therewill be none to defend them against Allah; as if their faces have been covered by patches of the dark night. Itis they who are the people of the Hell, they will abide therein for ever.

    And the Day when We shall raise all of them together, then will say to the polytheists, 'remain at your places,you and your associates; then We shall separate them from the Muslims, and their associates will say to them,'when you used to worship us'.

    Then Allah is sufficient as witness between you and us, that we were not aware of your worship.

    Here every soul will test what it sent before, and they shall be resumed to Allah, who is their true Master, andtheir all fabrications shall be lost from them.

    Say you, 'who provides you from the heaven and the earth: or who is the master of ear and eyes: and whobrings out the living from the dead and brings out the dead from the living and who plans all affairs? They willthen now say, 'Allah then say you, 'why do not you fear then?'

    This then is Allah. Your true Lord. What remains then after the truth but erring then where are you turningaway.

    Thus, the word of your Lord is proved against the transgressors, that they will not believe.

    Say you, 'Is there any of your associates who originate creation, then reproduce after destruction. Say you,'Allah originates, then He will reproduce after destruction,' then where are you turning away blindly

    Say you, 'Is there any of your associates that may guide to the truth? Say you, 'Allah guides to the truth.' Thenshould He Who guides to the truth be followed; or he who himself finds not the guidance unless is guided?Then what happened to you? How do you judge?

    And most of them follow not but conjecture. Undoubtedly, conjecture avails not against truth. No doubt, Allahknows their works.

    And this is not the attribute of this Quran, that any one might fabricate it without being sent down by Allah,Yes it is a confirmation of the former Books and is the detail explanation of what is written in the Table, thereis no doubt in it, it is from the Lord of the worlds.

    Do they say, 'he has fabricated it?' Say you, 'then bring a sure like it, and call upon all whom you could getbesides I Allah, if you are truthful.

    But they have belied that, the knowledge of which they did not get Control and they have not yet seen its endin the like manner have belied those who were before them, then see what became the end of the unjust.

    And of them, there is one who believes in it. And of them, there is one who does not believe in it, and yourLord knows well the mischief-makers.

    And if they belie you. Then say you, 'for me is my doing, and for you is your doing, you are not responsible forwhat I do, and I am not responsible for what you do.

    And of them are some who give ear to you, then will you make the deaf hear, even though they understandnot?

    And of them is one who looks at you, then will you guide the blind, even though they do not see?

    Undoubtedly. Allah does not do injustice to mankind. but men do injustice to them selves.

    And the Day when He will raise them, as if they had not stayed in the world but an hour of that Day, they shallmutually recognize Those who belied the meeting with Allah, remained in full loss and they were not onguidance.

    And if We show you some of the things, We are promising to them, or We call you unto Us before, anyhow,they have to return to Us, then Allah is a witness of what they do.

    And for every nation there has been a messenger, when their messenger had come to them, it would havebeen judged unto them with equity and they would not have been wronged.

    And they say, 'when this promise will come, if you are truthful.'

    Say, you 'I have no (Personal) power of the good and bad for myself but whatever Allah pleases.' For everynation there is fixed term. When their term will come, then neither they can stay behind for an hour, nor canthey advance.

    Say you, 'tell me, if His torment comes upon you by night or day, then what is there in for which the guilty arein hurry'?

    Will you then believe therein when it would occur actually? Do you now believe, whereas you were hasteningfor it before?

    Then it will be said to the wrongdoers. 'Taste the torment everlasting. You will get nothing more asrecompense but what ever you used to earn.'

    And they ask you. 'Is that true,' Say you, 'Yes by my Lord? No doubt, that is necessarily true. And you cannotget it tired.

    And if every unjust soul would have owned all that is in the earth, then it would certainly ransom for itself. Andthey were secretly ashamed in their hearts, when they saw the torment, and it was decided between them withequity and they shall not be wronged.

    Listen, no doubt, it is of Allah only whatever is in the heavens and earth Listen, verily Allah's promise is true,but most of them know not.

    He gives life and causes death, and to Him you shall return.

    'O people! There has come an admonition to you from your Lord, and healing of hearts, and a guidance and amercy for the believers.

    Say-you, 'only Allah' grace and only His mercy, on it therefore let them rejoice. That is better than all theirwealth.

    Say you, 'be-think what Allah has sent down to you of provision, you have yourselves made thereof lawful andunlawful.' Say you, 'Has Allah permitted it to you, or you forge lie against Allah?

    And what do they fancy who forge lie against Allah, that what will be their position on the Day of Resurrection?No doubt Allah is graceful to people, but most of them are not thankful.

    And you are busy in any work, and recite any Quran from Him, and you perform any act, We are witnessesover you when do you commence it. And there is nothing hidden from your Lord even an atom' weight in theearth or in heaven, and there is nothing smaller than that or greater but it is in a luminous Book.

    Listen carefully! No doubt, there is no fear nor any grief upon the friends of Allah

    Those who believed and keep up their duty.

    For them are glad tidings in the life of the world and in the Hereafter. The words of Allah are not changed.That indeed is the supreme triumphs.

    And you be not grieved by their words. No doubt, all honour belongs to Allah. 'It is He who hears, knows.

    Listen, no doubt, all who are in the heavens and all in the earth belong to Allah. And what they are followingthose. who are calling associates besides Allah? They follow nothing but fancy. And they are doing nothing butconjecturing.

    It is He Who has made night for you, that you may rest therein' and made the day enlightening. No doubt,therein are signs for those who listen.

    They spoke, Allah has taken to Him a son' 'Holy is He? The self-sufficient, to him belongs whatever is in theheavens and whatever is in the earth you have no authority for this. Do you say against Allah that you knownot?

    Say you. 'Those who forge lie against Allah, they will never prosper.'

    They are to pull on a little in the world. Then they are to return to Us. Then We shall make them taste a severetorment. The recompense of their infidelity

    Recite to them the story of Nuh. When he said to his people, 'O my people! If my standing up and remindingthe signs of Allah has offended you, then I relied on Allah only. Then do your work untidily. And complete yourwork with your false deities, so that nothing may be obscure to you in your work, then do against me what youcan and respite me not.

    Then if you turn your face, then I ask not any wage from you. My wage is only with Allah, and I have beenordered to be of Muslims.

    But they belied him, then We delivered him and those who were with him in the ark and We made themsuccessors. And We drowned those who belied Our signs, then see what was the end of those who werewarned.

    Then after him We sent other messengers towards their people. then they brought to them bright proofs, butthey were not to believe what they had already belied before. Thus We seal the hearts of the transgressors.

    Then after them We sent Musa and Haroon to Firawn and his courtiers with Our Signs, then they waxed proudand they were a sinful people.

    Then when truth came to them from Us, they said this is surely a manifest magic.

    Musa said, 'Do you say such with regard to the truth when it came to you? Is this magic? And magician doesnot attain to their goal.

    They said, 'Have you come to us. So that you may turn us from that upon which we found our forefathers, andthat you two may have greatness in the land? And we are not to believe you too.

    And Firawn said, 'Bring to me every magician of knowledge.'

    Then when the magicians came, Musa said to them, 'Cast down whatever you are to cast.'

    Then when they had cast down, Musa said, 'what you have brought is magic. Now, Allah will nullify it. Allahrectifies not the work of mischief-makers.

    And Allah shows the truth as truth by His words, may the culprits be displeased.

    Then none believed Muse but few from the seed of his people fearing from Firawn and his courtiers lest theymay compel them to fall back '(from Din). And no doubt, Firawn was high headed in the land, and no doubt hecrossed the limit.

    Musa said, 'O my people, if you have believed in Allah, then rely upon Him alone, if you are Muslims.'

    They said, 'We relied only upon Allah. Our Lord makes us not a test for unjust people.

    And deliver us by Your Mercy from the infidels.

    And We revealed to Musa and his brother, build houses for your people in Egypt. And make your house theplace of prayer, and establish prayer and give glad tidings to Muslims.'

    And Musa submitted, 'O our Lord! You have given Firawn and his chiefs adornment and wealth in the life of theworld, O our Lord! That they may lead people astray from Your path.' O our Lord! Destroy their wealth andharden their hearts, so that they may not believe until they see the painful torment.'

    He said, 'The prayers of you both have been accepted. Then be steadfast, and follow not the path ofignorants.'

    And We led the children of Israel across the sea. Then Firawn and his armies followed them with contumacyand oppression, until, when the drowning overtook him. He said, 'I believed, that there is no true diety exceptHe in whom the children of Israel believed, and I am Muslim.

    What! Now! And you had been disobedient from before and you had been mischief monger.

    Today We shall cause to swim your dead body, so that you might be a sign to those after you. And no doubt,people are heedless of Our signs.

    And no doubt, We gave a place of honour to the children of Israel and provided them with the pure things;they differed not, until the knowledge came to them. No doubt, your Lord will decide between them on the Dayof Resurrection in that with regard to which they differed.

    And O listener! If you are in some doubt regarding what We have sent down towards you, then ask those whorecite the Book before you, Indeed the truth has come to you from your Lord, then you never be of those whodoubt.

    And never be of those who belied the signs of Allah otherwise you shall be of the losers.

    No doubt, those against whom the word of your Lord has been proved correctly will not believe.

    Though all signs should come to them, until they see the painful torment.

    Then why there has not been any town that believed so that its belief would have profited, but yes, the peopleof Yunus. When they believed. We removed from them the torment of disgrace in the life of the world andallowed them to pull on for a time.

    And if your Lord had willed, all those who are in the earth would have believed together. Will you, then forcepeople until they become Muslims?

    And no soul has power to believe but by the leave of Allah. And He lays His torment upon those who have nowisdom.

    Say you, 'behold what is in the heavens and in the earth'! And signs and messengers give nothing to those.Who are not to believe.

    Then what for they are waiting, but the like of the days of those who passed away before them? Say you. 'thenwait I am too with you, in waiting.'

    Then We shall deliver Our Messengers and the believers It is thus binding on Our mercy to deliver the Muslims

    Say you,' 'O people! It you are in any doubt as to my religion, then I shall worship not those whom you worshipbesides Allah, yes I worship that Allah Who will cause you to die, and I have been commanded to be ofbelievers.

    And that: keep your face straight for the religion leaving all others, and never be of the polytheists.

    And worship not besides Allah that which can neither profit you nor harm you. Then if you do, then at that timethou would not be of the unjust.

    And if Allah touches you with any harm, then there is none to remove it save he, and if He desires good foryou, then there is none to repel His grace. He causes it to reach whomsoever of His bondsmen He wills. AndHe is the Forgiving, the Merciful.

    Say you, 'O people! The truth has come to you from your Lord, then who ever came aright, he came aright forhis own good, and whoever strayed, strayed against himself and I am not a guardian over you.

    And follow that which is revealed to you and have patience until Allah decrees And He is the Best of Judges.

======================================================



11.hud